---
title: "Covid Boon for Superphysics"
date: 2020-03-01
showdate: true
description: "Covid was great for Superphysics"
image: "/photos/med/covid.jpg"
icon: Juan
writer:
  name: Juan
  url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/jundalisay/
---


The Corona virus has caused lockdowns and so many startup events were cancelled. 

Our main moneyless app actually gained a lot of users, as we had predicted. 

However, we were running our servers on an AWS Activate Program that was set to expire this month when we really needed them to handle the influx of users.

This is because we had expected the crisis to start in 2019 and so we got the AWS credits for use in 2019 and not for 2020.

We were unable to move everything to another program (like Google Cloud Platform) because of the many things that were going on. It's like Nature saying having the last laugh, saying no matter how much you accurately predict it, it will make things happen just a little bit outside your prediction. 

This made us implement the following changes:
- We focus on long term sustainability instead of rapid scaling 
- We have to work with Nature step by step instead of trying to make large innovations 

We will use the time to focus on theory of Superphysics and pause our running app prototypes as we look for a cheaper hosting option.

{{< f f="Update Oct 2024: We ended up choosing Sveltekit after Svelte 5 came ouut" >}}

Anyway, we've been preparing for the Crisis Years which were supposed to begin last year. So it's a relief to know, that other than the timing, our efforts and decisions were correct!


{{< b >}}
Date | Notes
--- | ---
Dec 2020 | The Delta Variant is quite scary and it seems the lockdowns will be here to stay as the 'new normal'. We took the time to really dig into Kepler's works in order to unearth his theory of gravity to replace that of Newton and Einstein.  We apply the theory to create action-at-a-distance by making a 1 kilogram weight lighter.
<!-- Mar 2024 | We decided to switch to Astro JS on Supabase so we won't need AWS  -->
{{< /b >}}

