---
title: "Breaking Change: Supermath and Qualimath"
date: 2024-12-16
description: "We will be putting Qualimath under Supermath"
image: "/graphics/physics/math.jpg"
showdate: true
icon: Juan
---


When we created Qualimath in December 2020 during the pandemic, we only had Kepler, Pythagoras, and Plato as basis. 

We got into the works of Descartes in late 2022-2023 thanks to ChatGPT being able to translate the Latin and French of Descartes. 

And so we were able to extract Cartesian Relationality by 2024 as a complete replacement for Einstein's Relativity and more practically for relativistic of relational pricing from our moneyless system.*

{{< f f="We don't have the expensive equipment to test Cartesian Relationality to produce sustained anti-gravity (as movement without electromagnetic energy) and so we just use it for economic 'anti-gravity' (as gaining resources without money). This is explained by Bashar as [the 5 Forms of Abundance](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cTs8iM_nXAk)" >}}

You could say that Supermath is the base. This can be used within a planet or star system where the physical constants are constant.

Qualimath is a subset of Supermath and is for operations in other star systems, galaxies, or universes. This is where the physical constants change and so the origin star system is the relational source of truth.*

{{< f f="As app developers, this is a common problem we face pulling data from various sources, causing a mismatch" >}}

Supermath is mainly for homogenous waves and relations. 

Qualimath is for heterogenous waves. 

{{< q a="PR Sarkar" c="Idea and Ideology, Chapter 3" >}}
Hence, tanmátras [quantum-perceptions] are the waves produced by the objects as a result of reflection of the subtler bhúta [element or factor] on the cruder ones. Quantum-perceptions in the mathematical sense are **heterogeneous**, not homogeneous
{{< /q >}}


In the distant future, Qualimath will enlarge and absorb and replace Supermath just as [the Essassani no longer uses number for mathematics and instead uses shapes](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gKtIJ62lOic), such as the tetrahedron.
- This then unites Pythagoras and Plato (as the Platonic shapes) with the Essassani




{{< b >}}
Date | Notes
--- | ---
Oct 2025 | Someone asked us to look into the Buga Sphere. This led us into fractals as a replacement to Newton's Calculus. Calculus focuses on paths which is useless in teleportation and arbitrary levitation. The aether uses state-change-within-a-range which can be described by fractals.
{{< /b >}}

