---
title: "Supereconomics in a Nutshell Ebook (Free)"
image: "/graphics/econ/superecon.jpg"
date: 2025-02-14
showdate: true
description: "Now live at Google Play Books"
icon: Lam
writer:
  name: Lam
  url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/baolamnguyen/
---




We uploaded a free version of Supereconomics in a Nutshell which is a short version of the Supereconomics book which we are working on. 

https://play.google.com/store/books/details?id=6bhGEQAAQBAJ

https://books.google.com/books/about?id=6bhGEQAAQBAJ

{{< i s="/graphics/econ/superecon.jpg" a="Supereconomics" >}}


It is in line with a pitch event for a moneyless economic system this February.


Moneyless systems were practiced in many countries before the Europeans colonized the world and imposed the use of silver money. 

Moneyless transactions are meant to remove the time value of money so that there are no interest rates. This would then reduce inflation to natural levels. 

The time value of money is replaced by the time value of life. Everyone would be indebted to everyone else. This is why the virtue of 'utang na loob' is common in a moneyless system.

Non-payment of debt would be punished by servitude until the debt was paid. For example, Jacob in the Old Testament served Laban for a number of years. 

Instead of servitude, our system kicks out non-payers. This leaves a system of payers. 


## Speeding Up and Slowing Down an Economy

An economy is "monetized" to speed it up. But when there is too much money chasing too few goods, then the economy is made moneyless. 

In this way, interest rates do not need to be raised to cause a recession. 

Since there is no money, there would be no need for accountants. Only auditors would be needed to verify the valuation of debits and credits. The auditors would only do auditing so they can get a piece of the circulating productivity as a tax revenue. 

These advantages will make the moneyless system gradually eat up the market share of the money system until money becomes obsolete when the ratio of all prices become established. 

