---
title: "The Face of Superphysics"
date: 2025-01-11
description: "We will slowly replace stock images with local ones"
image: "/photos/countries/vn/fan.jpg"
showdate: true
icon: Juan
writer:
  name: Juan
  url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/jundalisay/
---


As our content increases and our scope enlarges, we realized the need to consolidate and make everything coherent.

We started out with a new economic science for our new economic system called NARA (Non Arbitrary Resource Allocation) way back in 2015 in Hanoi.

Back then, we were pitching our idea in hackathons and pitch events in Vietnam and we needed to form a team quickly. Some pitch events needed 5 people and we were only 3-4. 

Ngoc Anh gladly volunteered to fill the slot. In fact, she was team member number 2.

{{< youtube VG7-cV8B_lU >}}

I then moved on to Saigon where permanent cofounder Lam joined, helping us bootstrap both NARA (which evolved to become Pantrypoints) and Superphysics.

We will slowly replace stock photos with either AI-images or local ones with Ngoc Anh to have more consistency. 

{{< youtube Qbg3e2EyO94 >}}



<!-- img src="/photos/countries/vn/fan.jpg" alt="Vietnamese culture" -->


We hope that our face helps convey our multicultural roots that is fundamentally Asian, as we seek to dislodge the monopoly of:
- Western science
- Western medicine
- Western religion
- Western economic systems
- Western political systems
- Western educational systems

These have been imposed globally through colonialism and is causing so many problems such as:
- economic crisis
- political instability as communism versus capitalism
- materialism
- limited sciences
- lack of a solid spiritual and moral system


The current problematic, self-destroying world is exactly fulfilling the same pattern as the Roman Empire which destroyed itself. 

This does not mean were are totally anti-Western. Rather, we believe that every civilization has something to contribute to the system of knowledge (i.e. the sciences). 

One civilization (i.e. the West) should not have control of how all the other civilizations should see Nature and Existence. 

Instead we classify the systems of human knowledge that have made it into Superphysics into 3:

Greek-Egyptian 50% | Indian-Chinese 40% | Alien 10%
--- | --- | ---
Greeks | Indian | Essassani 
Atlantean-Egyptian | Chinese | Grays
French | Nepali-Tibetan (Buddhist) | Anunnaki
Scottish | Southeast Asian | Others
Dutch | |
Arab-Persian | | 
Native / South American | |


Francis Bacon is the only English so far in our list. We are still overhauling Newton to fit Descartes. 

We did not take any Roman sources, even Marcus Aurelius' *Meditations* was deficient in metaphysics. 

We put India (South Asia) on the top since they had spirituality all figured out. 

Next is the Chinese who also had spirituality, but added productivity, maths, and the Asian sciences with inventions like printing, gunpowder, and the compass. So it is natural for them to advance faster than the West which is stuck at smashing atoms uselessly and wasting time on the [scam Relativity of Einstein](/material/fallacies/scam). 

East Asian Productivity counteracts the poverty from South Asian Spirituality. 

Next is the Greeks who were able to learn from the Egyptians and Atlanteans before they were destroyed and the knowledge lost forever. 

Lastly, we use alien knowledge to test whether our compiled non-materialist knowledge will match with theirs, since Nature is just one.  

