---
title: "Breaking Change: Layers Instead of Elements"
image: "/graphics/super/operative.svg"
date: 2025-10-15
description: ""
showdate: true  
icon: Juan
writer:
  name: Juan
  url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/jundalisay/
---


Superhysics uses the 5 Elements model of the Ancient Greeks, Hindus, and Taoists. 

For a while, we kept the name "elements", only using "layers" for physical phenomena.

We used Elements for Biological and Mental or Soul phenomena.

However, people still confused elements with the chemical elements. 

So we decided to drop elements and use layers for all 15 elements.

Field of Study | Previous Naming | Current Naming
--- | --- | ---
Material Superphysics | Material Layer | same
Material Superphysics | Comvertible Layer | same
Material Superphysics | Radiant Layer | same
Material Superphysics | Spatial Layer | same
Material Superphysics | Aethereal Layer | same
Bio Superphysics | Earth Element | Earth Layer
Bio Superphysics | Water Element | Water Layer
Bio Superphysics | Fire Element | Fire Layer
Bio Superphysics | Air Element | Air Layer
Bio Superphysics | Aethereal Element | Aethereal Layer
Spiritual Superphysics | Material Stratum | Crude Layer
Spiritual Superphysics | Comvertible Stratum | Subtle Layer
Spiritual Superphysics | Radiant Stratum | Astral Layer
Spiritual Superphysics | Spatial Stratum | Essential Layer
Spiritual Superphysics | Aethereal Stratum | Crude Layer


{{< i s="/graphics/super/operative.svg" a="Layers" >}}

## How We Got Them

We finished the MSQ model for the material world and so we next went to make the MSQ model for the biological world to account for chi and chakras.

For biolgical electrons, I remembered Yogananda's book mentioning lifetrons. 

So while reviewing that, I came upon Sri Yukteswar's [astral dimension](https://www.reddit.com/r/Meditation/comments/2mm7fu/hiranyaloka_the_astral_planet_for_advanced_beings/) and was able to use it to fill the 5 strata into the 5 metaphysical layers.  



