---
title: "Cottage Industries"
weight: 10
writer:
  name: PR Sarkar
  url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prabhat_Ranjan_Sarkar
description: "Various types of cottage industries should be established on master units, subject to the availability of raw materials"
c: "#DE3163"
icon: "PR Sarkar"
---


Various types of cottage industries should be established on master units, subject to the availability of raw materials. 

Cottage industries are:

1. Animal and insect products<!-- The first stage of processing farm products of --> 
- milk
- wool
- silk thread
- lacquer
- honey and wax

2. Plant products <!-- roducing all types of farm products derived from plants, such as --> 
- papadam from pulse
- beaten rice from rice
- cereal flakes from cereals
- jams from fruits, etc.

3. Industrial products and herbal medicines from plants 
- essences
- ayurvedic medicines
- naturopathic remedies

4. Medicines and equipment of non-plant origin
- allopathic and biochemic medicines
- medical equipment such as pressure gauges

5. Plant fibres
- jute
- cotton
- linen
- hemp
- banana
- pineapple
- sisal
- okra
- basil

6. Non-plant Fibres 
- nylon
- rayon
- plastic
- artificial silk

7. Non-metallic minerals 
- calcium carbonate
- calcium sulphate
- calcium phosphate
- conch shells
- rubber and oyster shells

8. Non-metallic products
- soap, liquid soap
- shampoo 
- toothpaste
- toothbrushes
- detergent
- nectar.

9. Metallic products
- gold
- aluminum
- bronze
- brass
- zinc, etc.
- tin articles
- thermometers
- crockery
- utensils.

10. Iron products
- steel
- stainless steel
- grinding machines
- cement and fertilizers.

<!-- These are just a few examples of some of the items which can be produced. There are in fact many items which can be produced under each category.  -->

In poor areas, two or three simple industries can be started first, such as manufacturing briefcases, medicines or making flour with grinding machines. 

<!-- If cottage industries are properly established, poor local people will enjoy immediate economic benefits. -->


## Energy Production

The following energy can be produced on a small scale:
- solar energy: This can power lights and water from solar panels
- thermal power: This is from coal and other fossil fuels
- bio-gas: This is from bio-mass waste for generators, cooking, lighting and small generators
- hydroelectricity
- pneumatic power: This is powered by the wind. It is one of the cheapest sources of energy for pumps and generators because the only costs are the initial capital investment to construct the mill and that of maintenance. 


The bio-gas plant harnesses the gas generated by the decomposition of the bio-mass, which can then be collected and used for various purposes. 

Cow, buffalo and human excreta can be used in bio-gas plants.

The slurry is an excellent manure because it breaks down in about one week, whereas fresh manure takes up to 6 months. 

Slurry takes only 3 days to reach the roots of a plant compared to 3 months for normal manure. 

Slurry can nourish a plant within 10 days, whereas normal cow dung takes up to 9 months.

Small-scale hydroelectric plants can also be constructed in the right environment. The Daksina River at Ánanda Nagar can allow a hydroelectric power plant. It can produce power for up to 9 months of the year.
