---
heading: Proposition 48
title: "Finding the orbits from the focus given"
description: "Make a body move in a trajectory that revolves around the center of force in the same way as another body in the same trajectory at rest"
author: Newton
draft: true
c: "firebrick"
---



## PROPOSITION 48 THEOREM 16

If a wheel stands upon the outside of a globe at right angles thereto, and revolving about its own axis goes forward in a great circle, the length lite curvilinear path which any point, given in the perimeter of the
wheel, hath described, since, the time that it touched the globe (which
curvilinear path w~e may call the cycloid, or epicycloid), will be to double
of the versed sine of half the arc which since that time has touched the
globe in passing over it, as the sn,m of the diameters of the globe and
the wheel to the semi-diameter of the globe.


## PROPOSITION 49 THEOREM 17

If a wheel stand upon the inside of a concave globe at right angles there
to, and revolving about its own axis go forward in one of the great
of the globe, the length of the curvilinear path which any point,
given in the perimeter of the wheel^ hath described since it toncJied the
circles
globe, imll be to the double of the versed sine of half the arc which in
all that time has touched the globe in passing over it, as the difference
of the diameters of the globe and the wheel to the semi-diameter of the
globe.

ABL
Let
E
be the globe.
the centre of the wheel,
C its centre, BPV the wheel insisting thereon,
B the point of contact, and P the given point
in the perimeter of the wheel.
circle
ABL
from
A
through B
the given point
P
this
wheel to proceed in the great
its progress to revolve in
be always equal one to the other,
in the peri meter of the wheel may describe in thf
such a manner that the arcs
:if;d
Imagine
towards L, and in
AB, PB may185
SEC. X.I
s
H
AP
be the whole curvilinear
Let
the curvilinear path AP.
the globe in A, and the length cf
touched
wheel
the
described
since
path
will be to twice the versed sine of the arc |PB as 20 E to
this path
mean time
AP
let the right line CE (produced if need be) meet the wheel in V,
and join CP, BP, EP, VP produce CP, and let fall thereon the perpen
Let PH, VH, meeting in H, touch the circle in P and V,
dicular VF.
and let PH cut YF in G, and to VP let fall the perpendiculars GI, HK.
CB.
For
;
From
the centre
C
with any interval
CP in n
AP in m ;
cutting the right line
the curvilinear path
Vo
let there
t
let there
be described the circle wow,
BP
in o, and
the perimeter of the wheel
with the interval
and from the centre
V
be described a circle cutting
VP
produced in
q.
progress always revolves about the point of con
tact B. it is manifest that the right line BP is perpendicular to that curve line
which the point P of the wheel describes, and therefore that the right
Because the wheel in
its
AP
VP will touch this curve in the point P. Let the radius of the circle nmn
be gradually increased or diminished so that at last it become equal to the
distance CP and by reason of the similitude of the evanescent figure
line
;
Pnn-mq, and the figure
Pra, P//, Po,
that
P&amp;lt;y,
AP, the right
line
PFGVI,
is,
the ultimate ratio of the evanescent lined ae
the ratio of the
CP, the
circular arc
momentary mutations of the curve
BP, and the right line VP, will

1.
PV, PF, PG, PI, respectively. But since VF is
and
VH to CV, and therefore the angles HVG, VCF
OF,
as of the lines
perpendicular to
VHG
(because the angles of the quadrilateral figure
equal= and the angle
are right in
and P) is equal to the angle CEP, the triangles
V HG,
will be similar and thence it will come to pass that as EP is
HVEP
V
CEP
to CE so is HG to HV or HP, and so KI to KP, and by composition or
division as CB to CE so is PI to PK, and doubling the consequents asCB
;
to
2CE
line
so
PI
to
VP, that
curve line
is,
AP
is
PV, and
so is
Pq
to
Pm.
the increment of the line
in a given ratio of
CB
Therefore the decrement of the
BY VP to
to
the increment of the
2CE, and
therefore (by Cor.
BY YP and AP, generated by those increments, arc
BY be radius, YP is the cosine of the angle BYP
YP is the versed sine of the same angle, and
or -*BEP, and therefore BY
therefore in this wheel, whose radius is ^BV, BY
YP will be double the
versed sine of the arc ^BP.
Therefore AP is to double the versed sine oi
the arc ^BP as 2CE to CB.

The line AP in the former of these Propositions we shall name the cy
Lena. IV) the lengths
in the same ratio.
But if
cloid without the globe, the other in the latter Proposition the cycloid within
the globe, for distinction sake.
COR. 1. Hence if there be described the
same be bisected in S, the len c th of the part
(which
2CE
COR.
PS
the double of the sine of the angle
CB, and therefore in a given ratio.
is
to
2.
And
ASL, and the
will be to the length PV
entire cycloid
YBP, when
EB
is
radius) as
the length of the semi-perimeter of the cycloid AS will be
which is to the dumeter of the wheel BY as 2CF
equal to a right line
toCB.

## PROPOSITION 50 PROBLEM 33

Cause a pendulous body to oscillate in a given cycloid

Let:

- Globe QVS have a center C
- cycloid QRS, bisected in R, and meeting the superficies of the and S on either
globe with its extreme points Q
Let there be drawn
CR
birxcting the arc
in such
in O, and let it be produced to
to CR.
as
to
sort that
may be
hand.
QS
CO
CA
About the centre C, with the
A
CO
interval
CA,
let
and
there be described an exterior globe DAF
is
diameter
whose
wheel
a
this
within
globe, by
;
AO,
let
there be described two semi-cycloids AQ,,
and meeting the exterior globe
and S,
AS, touching the interior globe in Q,
thread
a
with
From that point A,
in A.
APT
AR,
let the
body
T
depend, and
oscillate in
in length equal to the line
such manner between the twoSlCC.
OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.
X.J
187
that, as often as the pendulum parts from the per
the
may be applied to that
pendicular AR,
upper part of the thread
the
motion
and fold itself round
which
APS
towards
tends,
semi-cycloid
that curve line, as if it were some solid obstacle, the remaining part of the
semi-cycloids
AQ, AS,
AP
same thread
PT
Then
straight.
which has not yet touched the semi-cycloid continuing
will the
T
weight
oscillate in the
given cycloid
QRS.
Q.E.F.
PT
For
QRS
QOS
PT
in T, and the circle
let the thread
meet the cycloid
and to the rectilinear part of the thread
be drawn
V, and let
let there be erected the perpendiculars
from the extreme points P and
in B and W.
It is evident, from the
the
line
W, meeting
BP,
right
m
0V
j
T
T
CV
construction and generation of the similar figures AS, SR, that those per
pendiculars PB, TVV, cut off from CV the lengths VB, VVV equal the
diameters of the wheels OA, OR.
Therefore
is to VP (which is dou
TP
VBP when ^BV is radius) as BYV to BV, or AO
-f-OR to AO, that is (since CA and CO, CO and CR and by division AO
and OR are proportional), as CA + CO to CA, or, if BV be bisected in E,
ble the sine of the angle
;
as
2CE
to
CB.
Therefore (by Cor.
1,
Prop.
XLIX),
the length of the
of the cycloid
of the cycloid
PT is always equal to the arc
APT is always equal to the half
rectilinear part of the thread
PS, and the whole thread
that is (by Cor. 2, Prop. XLIX), to the length AR.
And there
fore contrariwise, if the string remain always equal to the length AR, the
APS,
T will always move in the given cycloid QRS. Q.E.D.
COR. The string AR is equal to the semi-cycloid AS, and therefore has
the same ratio to AC the semi-diameter of the exterior globe as the like
point
semi-cycloid
SR
has to
CO
the semi-diameter of the interior globe.

## PROPOSITION 51 THEOREM 18

If a centripetal force tending on all sides to the centre C of a globe, be in
all places as the distance of the place from the centre, and by this force

oscillate (in the manner above de
alone acting upon it, the body
the
in
the
/ say, that all the oscil
perimeter of
scribed]
cycloid
how
in
soever
will
be performed in equal
lations,
tfiemselves,
unequal
QRS
;
times.
W
T infinitely produced let fall the perpendicular
CT.
and
Because
the centripetal force with which the body T
CX,
join
towards
C
is as the distance CT, let this
is
impelled
(by Cor. 2, of the
For upon the tangent
I
,aws) be resolved into
body directly from
P
the parts CX, TX, of
stretches the thread PT,
which
CX
impelling the
and by the resistance the
rhread makes to it is totally employed, producing no other effect but the
3ther part TX, impelling the body transversely or towards X, directly
Then it is plain that the accelera
accelerates the motion in the cycloid.
;
tion
of the body, proportional to this accelerating force, will bo every

moment
WV,
as
and
the length
TX,
TX,
[BOOK
that
is
(because
1
CV\
TW proportional to them are given),
TW,
as the length
that is (by Cor. 1, Prop. XLIX)
as the length of the arc of the cycloid TR.
If there
fore two pendulums APT, Apt, be
drawn
unequally
aside from the perpendicular AR, and let fall
together,
their accelerations will be always as the arcs to be de
tR.
But the parts described at the
are as the accelerations, thai
of
the
motion
beginning
are
to be described at the be
that
the
wholes
as
is,
scribed
TR,
ginning, and therefore the parts which remain to be
described, and the subsequent accelerations proportional to those parts, are
also as the wholes, and so on.
Therefore the accelerations, and consequently
the velocities generated, and the parts described with those velocities, and
the parts to be described, are always as the wholes and therefore the parts
to be described
preserving a given ratio to each other will vanish together,
that is, the two bodies oscillating will arrive together at the perpendicular AR.
;
And since on the other hand
the ascent of the pendulums from the lowest place
the
same cycloidal arcs with a retrograde motion, is retarded in
through
the several places they pass through by the same forces by which their de
R
scent
was accelerated
:
it is
plain that the velocities of their ascent and de
and consequently performed in equal
and
two
the
since
and, therefore,
parts of the cycloid
lying
on either side of the perpendicular are similar and equal, the two pendu
lums will perform as well the wholes as the halves of their oscillations in
scent through the
times
same
arcs are equal,
RQ
RS
;
the same times.

## Corollary 

The force with which the body T is accelerated or retarded in any
place T of the cycloid, is to the whole weight of the same body in the
highest place
S
or Q, as the arc of the cycloid
TR
is
to the arc
SR or QR
