---
title: Providence and a Future State
description: My friend loves sceptical paradoxes. He advanced many principles which I do not approve of
c: "steelblue"
weight: 34
writer:
  name: David Hume
  url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Hume
icon: "David Hume"
heading: "Section 11"
---


<sup>102</sup> My friend loves sceptical paradoxes. He advanced many principles which I do not approve of. <!-- , yet as they seem to be curious, and to bear some relation to the chain of reasoning carried on throughout this enquiry, I shall here copy them from my memory as accurately as I can, in order to submit them to the judgement of the reader.  the singular good fortune of -->

Our conversation began with my admiring philosophy which:
- requires entire liberty above all
- flourishes from the free opposition of sentiments and arguments
- was born in an ancient Greece in an age and country of freedom and toleration
- was never cramped, even in its most extravagant principles, by any creeds, concessions, or penal statutes. 

Ancient Greece only had 2 instances of bigotted jealousy:
- the banishment of Protagoras, and
- the death of Socrates

<!-- , with which our present age is so much infested -->

Epicurus lived at Athens to an old age, in peace.

Epicureans were even admitted to:
- receive the sacerdotal character
- officiate at the altar

<!-- , in the most sacred rites of the established religion:  -->

The public encouragement of pensions and salaries was afforded equally by the wisest of all the Roman emperors29 to the professors of every sect of philosophy.

<!-- How requisite such kind of treatment was to philosophy, in her early youth, will easily be conceived, if we reflect, that, even a -->

At present, philosophy is supposed to now be more hardy and robust.
- Yet she is punished by harsh winds of calumny and persecution

 <!-- bears with much difficulty the inclemency of the seasons, and those  -->

My friend says that <!-- I admire ys , as the singular good fortune of philosophy, what seems to result from the natural course of things, and to be unavoidable in every age and nation. This --> the pertinacious bigotry which is fatal to philosophy is really her offspring. 

This bigotry:
- allies with superstition
- separates himself entirely from the parent's interest
- becomes her most inveterate enemy and persecutor. 

Such furious disputes now manifest as the speculative dogmas of religion.
- These could not have beeen conceived in the early ages when mankind was illiterate.

<!-- , formed an idea of religion more suitable to their weak apprehension, and composed their sacred tenets of such tales chiefly as were the objects of traditional belief, more than of argument or disputation. -->

<!-- After the first alarm, therefore, was over, which arose from the new paradoxes and principles of the philosophers; these  -->

During the ages of antiquity, the first teachers lived in harmony with the established superstition.
- Philosophy <!-- , and to have made a fair partition of mankind between them; the former -->  claimed all the learned and wise
- Superstition possessed all the vulgar and illiterate. 


<!-- 103. It seems then, say I, that you leave politics entirely out of the question, and never suppose, that  -->

<sup>103</sup> The tenets of Epicurus:
- deny a divine existence
- deny a providence and a future state <!-- , and consequently -->
- loosen the ties of morality
- is bad for society
<!-- , and may be supposed, for that reason, pernicious to the peace of civil society.  -->

A wise magistrate can justly be jealous of Epicurus' tenets.

{{< r a="Friend" >}}
These persecutions never, in any age, proceeded from calm reason, or from experience of the pernicious consequences of philosophy. They arose entirely from passion and prejudice. 
{{< /r >}}


But I assert that if Epicurus had been accused before the people he easily could have:
- defended his cause
- proved his principles to be as salutary as those of his adversaries

 <!-- who endeavoured, with such zeal, to expose him to the public hatred and jealousy?  -->

<!-- I wish, said I, you would try your eloquence upon so extraordinary a topic, and make a speech for Epicurus, which might satisfy, not the mob of Athens, if you will allow that ancient and polite city to have contained any mob, but the more philosophical part of his audience, such as might be supposed capable of comprehending his arguments. The matter would not be difficult, upon such conditions, replied he: And if you please, I shall suppose myself Epicurus for a moment, and make you stand for the Athenian people, and shall deliver you such an harangue as will fill all the urn with white beans, and leave not a black one to gratify the malice of my adversaries. Very well: Pray proceed upon these suppositions.  -->


<sup>104</sup> The religious philosophers are not satisfied with:
- the tradition of your forefathers
- the doctrine of your priests (in which I willingly acquiesce)

<!-- I come hither, O ye Athenians, to justify in your assembly what I maintained in my school, and I find myself impeached by furious antagonists, instead of reasoning with calm and dispassionate enquirers. Your deliberations, which of right should be directed to questions of public good, and the interest of the commonwealth, are diverted to the disquisitions of speculative philosophy; and these magnificent, but perhaps fruitless enquiries, take place of your more familiar but more useful occupations. -->

<!-- But so far as in me lies, I will prevent this abuse. We shall not here dispute concerning the origin and government of worlds. We shall only enquire how far such questions concern the public interest. And if I can persuade you, that they are entirely indifferent to the peace of society and security of government, I hope that you will presently send us back to our schools, there to examine, at leisure, the question the most sublime, but at the same time, the most speculative of all philosophy.  -->


They:
- try to use rash curiosity to establish religion on the principles of reason
- excite, instead of satisfying, the doubts which naturally arise from enquiry 
- magnificently paint the order, beauty, and wise arrangement of the universe
- then ask could such a glorious display of intelligence come from chance or the fortuitous concourse of atoms?
 

<!--  could produce what the greatest genius can never sufficiently admire.  -->

<!-- I shall not examine the justness of this argument. I shall allow it to be as solid as my antagonists and accusers can desire. 

The question is entirely speculative.  -->


{{< r a="Epicurus" >}}
I, Epicurus:
- deny a providence and a future state.
- do not undermine the foundations of society. 

Instead, I advance natural principles

<!-- , which they themselves, upon their own topics, if they argue consistently, must allow to be solid and satisfactory -->. 


<!-- You then, who are my accusers, have acknowledged, that  -->


<sup>105</sup> I have never questioned a divine existence.

The chief argument for a divine existence is derived from the order of nature. 
- This order has marks of intelligence and design
- You think it extravagant to assign for its cause, either:
  - chance, or
  - the blind and unguided force of matter. 

<!-- You allow, that this is an argument drawn from effects to causes.  -->

From the order of the universe, you infer that there must have been project and forethought in the workman. 

<!-- If you cannot make out this point, you allow, that your conclusion fails; and you pretend not to establish the conclusion in a greater latitude than the phenomena of nature will justify.

These are your concessions. I desire you to  -->

What are the consequences of your thinking? 


When we infer any particular cause from an effect, we must proportion the one to the other. 
- We can only ascribe to the cause those qualities that are exactly sufficient to produce the effect. 

A 10 ounce weight on a scale proves that the counterbalancing weight exceeds 10 ounces. 
- But it can never afford a reason that it exceeds 100.

If the cause, assigned for any effect, is not sufficient to produce it, we must either reject that cause, or add to it such qualities as will give it a just proportion to the effect.

But if we ascribe to it farther qualities, or affirm it capable of producing other effects, we can only indulge the licence of conjecture, and arbitrarily suppose the existence of qualities and energies, without reason or authority.

The same rule holds, whether the cause assigned be brute unconscious matter, or a rational intelligent being. If the cause be known only by the effect, we never ought to ascribe to it any qualities, beyond what are precisely requisite to produce the effect: Nor can we, by any rules of just reasoning, return back from the cause, and infer other effects from it, beyond those by which alone it is known to us. 

No one, merely from the sight of one of Zeuxis's pictures, could know, that he was also a statuary or architect, and was an artist no less skilful in stone and marble than in colours. 

The talents and taste, displayed in the particular work before us; these we may safely conclude the workman to be possessed of. The cause must be proportioned to the effect; and if we exactly and precisely proportion it, we shall never find in it any qualities, that point farther, or afford an inference concerning any other design or performance. Such qualities must be somewhat beyond what is merely requisite for producing the effect, which we examine. 


<sup>106</sup> If gods were the authors of the universe, then they have that power, intelligence, and benevolence which appears in the universe.
- But these cannot be proven.

<!-- ; but nothing farther can ever be proved, except we call in the assistance of exaggeration and flattery to supply the defects of argument and reasoning.  -->

So far as the traces of any attributes, at present, appear, so far may we conclude these attributes to exist. 

The following are mere hypotheses:
- the supposition of farther attributes
- the supposition that in distant regions of space or periods of time, there has been, or will be, a more magnificent display of these attributes, and a scheme of administration more suitable to such imaginary virtues. 

We can never be allowed to mount up from the universe, the effect, to Jupiter, the cause; and then descend downwards, to infer any new effect from that cause; as if the present effects alone were not entirely worthy of the glorious attributes, which we ascribe to that deity.

The knowledge of the cause is derived solely from the effect.
- They must be exactly adjusted to each other.

The one can never refer to anything farther, or be the foundation of any new inference and conclusion.

You find certain phenomena in nature. 

You seek a cause or author. 

You imagine that you have found him. 

You afterwards become so enamoured with this offspring of your brain.
- You imagine it impossible.
- But he must produce something greater and more perfect than the present scene which is so full of disorder. 

You forget that:
- this superlative intelligence and benevolence are entirely imaginary, or, at least, without any foundation in reason.
- you have no ground to ascribe to him any qualities, but what you see he has actually exerted and displayed in his productions. 

Let your gods, therefore, O philosophers, be suited to the present appearances of nature: and presume not to alter these appearances by arbitrary suppositions, in order to suit them to the attributes, which you so fondly ascribe to your deities. 
{{< /r >}}
