---
title: The Origin of Ideas
description: We divide all the perceptions of the mind into Thoughts or Ideas, and Impressions
icon: "David Hume"
c: "steelblue"
weight: 6
heading: "Section 2"
writer:
  name: David Hume
  url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Hume
--- 



There is a big difference between the mind's perceptions:
- when a man feels the pain of excessive heat, or the pleasure of moderate warmth
- when he afterwards recalls to his memory this sensation, or anticipates it by his imagination.

These faculties may mimic the perceptions of the senses.
- But they never can entirely reach the force and vivacity of the original sentiment. 

<!-- The utmost we say of them, even when they operate with greatest vigour, is, that  -->

They represent their object in so lively a manner, that we could almost say we feel or see it. 

But, except the mind be disordered by disease or madness, they never can arrive at such a pitch of vivacity, as to render these perceptions altogether undistinguishable. 

Poetry can never paint natural objects as to make the description be taken for real. <!--  landskip. -->
- The most lively thought is still inferior to the dullest sensation.

A like distinction runs through all the other perceptions of the mind. 

An angry man is actuated in a very different manner from one who only thinks of anger.

The idea of a person being in love is different from actually being in love. 
<!-- If you tell me, that any person is in love, I easily understand your meaning, and form a just conception of his situation; 

but never can mistake that conception for the real disorders and agitations of the passion.  -->

When we reflect on our past sentiments and affections, our thought is a faithful mirror. 
- It copies its objects truly. 
- But the colours which it employs are faint and dull, in comparison of those in which our original perceptions were clothed. 

It requires no nice discernment or metaphysical head to mark the distinction between them. 


<sup>12</sup> Here therefore we may divide all the perceptions of the mind into 2 classes:
- Thoughts or Ideas
  - These are less forcible and lively
- Impressions
  - These are our more lively perceptions
  - Examples are those that we hear, see, feel, love, hate, desire, or will. 
<!-- , which are distinguished by their different degrees of force and vivacity. --> 

<!-- Impressions are distinguished from ideas, which are the less lively perceptions, of which we are conscious, when we reflect on any of those sensations or movements above mentioned.  -->



<sup>13</sup> Human thoughts are most unbound. They escape all human power and authority and not even restrained within the limits of nature and reality. 

We can imagine:
- monsters
- join incongruous shapes and appearances

These cost the imagination no more trouble than to conceive the most natural and familiar objects. 

The body is confined to one planet where it creeps with pain and difficulty.

But the thought can instantly transport us:
- into the farthest regions of the universe or
- even beyond the universe into the unbounded chaos where nature is supposed to lie in total confusion.



We can conceive what never was seen or heard of.

There is nothing beyond the power of thought, except what implies an absolute contradiction. 


But though our thought  seems to possess this unbounded liberty, it is really confined within very narrow limits.

All this creative power of the mind amounts to no more than the faculty of compounding, transposing, augmenting, or diminishing the materials afforded us by the senses and experience. 

When we think of a golden mountain, we join 2 consistent ideas:
- gold
- mountain

We have known gold and mountain in the past. 

A virtuous horse is made up of:
- virtue
- horse

We can know virtue. We can unite it to a horse, which we also know. 
