---
heading: "Part 4"
title: "Topological Spinors and Their Observation"
description: ""
c: "darkgoldenrod"
weight: 12
date: 2021-04-01
---


The appearance of topological spinors may then finally be interrogated under observation byג

. Let x ∈ U ⊂ X be a point in the neighborhood of a local observation גU .

If ΨגU (x) ∈ /S(C) is a topological spinor, then under an observation by ג

∗ on
X it will appear as

<!-- ΨגU (x) ∈ /Sx
(T X)
| {z } -->

Space-Time Spinors

<!-- ⊗ /Sx
(Nג)x))
| {z } -->

‘Internal’ Quantum Numbers (4.1)

so that an observer may be lead into error. While the topological spinor under
observation is not generated by any algebraic auxiliary data unconnected to X,
it is quite likely to appear as if it contains auxiliary internal quantum numbers if
the observer is unaware of the Observerse structure involving Y , as the pull back
fields via ג

∗ would have the false appearance of being native to X. A tell tale
sign that one might be looking at such a unified structure with a single origin in
X would be the presence of a power of 2 in the dimension count of the auxiliary
quantum numbers for /Sx
(Nג)x)). 

Specifically, on an even dimensional manifold
26
of signature (i, j) = n we would expect to see internal quantum numbers of
dimension

<!-- Dim( /Sx
(Nג)x))
| {z } -->

‘Internal’ QN

<!-- ) = 2 i
2+j
2+2ij+i+j
4
| {z }

Dirac
or 2
i
2+j
2+2ij+i+j−4
4
| {z }
Weyl
(4.2) -->

depending on whether the theory was non-chiral (Dirac) or either effectively or
fundamentally chiral (Weyl). In particular, we might expect the later in regions
U ⊂ Xi,j where gravity and curvature are weak and the former where they are
strong and resistant to effective decoupling. And, to our way of thinking,

<!-- i
2+j
2+2ij+i+j−4
4
| {z }
Weyl
= 2
1
2+32+2∗1∗3+1+3−4
4 = 16C (4.3) -->


this, with a doublet of charged and uncharged leptons together with a tri-colored
positively charged quark and its negatively charged weak isospin doublet partners along with the anti-particles of all the preceding, appears to be exactly what we see repeated over three apparent low energy families.
Lastly, we note from personal communication that Frank Wilczek appears
to have wondered about the spinorial coincidence (even in print), but did not
find it compelling enough to pursue beyond noting its existence and the lack of
incorporation within a physical framework. It is our hope that recognizing that

Figure 3: Wilczek On Internal Spinors.

the ‘10’ implicit within both the Georgi-Glashow and Pati-Salam theories may
be tied to the 10 coupled equations of General Relativity may be considered
compelling.

4.1 Maximal Compact and Complex Subgroup Reductions of Structure Group

Assume for the moment that we have a global observation:

<!-- ג : X −→ Y (4.4) -->

or, in our case, simply that we have a given metric on X. The push-forward
map induced on the tangent bundle T X given by

<!-- Dג : T X −→ T Y (4.5) -->

splits the tangent bundle on Y along ג)X) ⊂ Y into the image of Dג and its 10
dimensional complement V
10 along the fiber of metrics for every x ∈ X. This
creates an identification with the chimeric bundle C = V10 ⊕ H∗
4 as the vertical
piece is already a subset of both T Y and C by construction, and Im(Dג= (

<!-- (H4
xג
) -->


Having seen that the natural break down of our Chimeric Spin(7, 7) bundle under observation leads to a decomposition into tangent and normal components of dimensions 4 and 10 respectively, it is natural to ask what reductions of structure group are most natural to expect. Two immediately suggest themselves.
Given any normal bundle that is even dimensional, there is a natural question
as to whether it admits a complex or quaternionic structure. Here the dimension 10 being equal to 2 mod 4 suggests seeking a complex structure through
reduction of structure group to U(3, 2) ⊂ Spin(6, 4).

Conversely, given the non-compact nature of Spin(6, 4) it is natural to wonder whether the structure group breaking to a maximal compact subgroup with
better stability behavior is advantaged. Thus while non-compact groups are
certainly considered from time to time, if the subgroup was broken to a maximal compact sub-group, we would be anthropically screened from seeing how nature accommodates non-compact symmetry and thus without guidance as to
how to find a theory which extends to the general case.

To this end, we might also consider both reductions simultaneously and ask
how a reduction to a maximal compact subgroup would appear if it were accompanied by a simultaneous reduction to accommodate a 5 complex dimensional normal bundle. Starting from Spin(1, 3) × Spin(6, 4)

<!-- Observerse
z }| {
Einstein
z }| {
Space-Time
z }| {
Spin(1, 3) ×
Frobenius
z }| {
Traceless
z }| {
Spin(6, 3) ×
Trace
z }| {
Spin(0, 1) −→
Horizontal
z }| {
Spin(1, 3) ×
Vertical
z }| {
Spin(6, 4) −→
Chimeric
z }| {
Spin(7, 7)
∪
Spin(1, 3) × Spin(6) × Spin(4)
| {z }
Maximal Compact
=∼
Sl(2, C) × SU(4) × (SU(2) × SU(2))
| {z }
Pati-Salam
(Via Low Dimensional
Isomorphism)
∪
Sl(2, C)
| {z }
GR
× SU(3) × SU(2) × U(1)
| {z }
Standard Model
(4.6) -->

where the Standard Model group is found within the intersection of the simultaneous reductions up to a reductive factor of U(1) if the special unitary group SU(3, 2) is not privileged over the full unitary group U(3, 2) to begin with.
