---
title: "2020-present"
# heading: "The evolution of Superphysics"
#date: 2022-08-14
weight: 20
description: "We list the events in the evolution of Superphysics from 2020-present"
image: "/covers/2020.png"
draft: true
writer:
  name: Juan
  url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/jundalisay/
---


## 2020

Date | Notes
--- | ---
March | The Corona virus has caused lockdowns and so many startup events were cancelled. We will use the time to focus on theory of Superphysics and pause our running app prototypes.
Dec | The Delta Variant is quite scary and it seems the lockdowns will be here to stay as the 'new normal'. We took the time to really dig into Kepler's works in order to unearth his theory of gravity to replace that of Newton and Einstein.  We apply the theory to create action-at-a-distance by making a 1 kilogram weight lighter. 


## 2021


Date | Notes
--- | ---
2021 | We started simplifying Francis Bacon's Nova Organum
July 15 | We changed SORA into Pantrypoints, learning from the [Community Pantry phenomenon](https://mb.com.ph/2021/05/06/who-is-patricia-non-the-woman-who-sparked-kindness-through-the-maginhawa-community-pantry/) during the lockdowns 



## 2022

Date | Notes
--- | ---
Jul 1 | We started simplifying Descartes' [works](/research/descartes/) which is the main basis for Material Superphysics 
Sep 1 | We started simplifying the works of [Averroes](/research/averroes/) and [Avicenna](/research/avicenna/) to uncover their Physics principles using Descartes as the standard instead of Newton


## 2023

Date | Notes
--- | ---
Feb 20 | We posted our video explaining our [Elastic Theory of Gravity](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IMOftV0yfso)
Mar 1 | Started simplifying [Le Sage](/research/lesage/gravity/) after getting feedback for our Elastic Theory
Mar 3 | Started simplifying [Leibniz](/research/leibniz/monadology/part-1/) and found that his Monads are his version of Aristotlean substance
Apr 22 | Changed 'Medical Superphysics' into 'Bio Superphysics' to better accommodate agriculture. In this way, both Medical Superphysics and Agricultural Superphysics (Supermedicine and Superagriculture) are under Bio Superphysics, just as Supereconomics and Supersociology (Economic Superphysics and Political Superphysics) are under Social Superphysics
Oct 25 | Changed to Tailwind theme to match our Phoenix apps
Dec 8 | Changed Universal Relativity to Universal Relationality to avoid any reference to Einstein and to be more in line with relational databases
Dec 27 | Replaced Github comments system with the usual post to API 


## 2024

Date | Notes
--- | ---
Jan 2, 2024 | Updated the naming convention for Material Superphysics particles. Abandoned boy and girl charges. 
Feb 2, 2024 | Added De Magnete by Gilbert and Kelvin's Vortex Atoms  
Mar 2, 2024 | Changed the order of Laws of Value 2, 3, 4 to match the social cycles. 
April 2024 | Added Buddhist Sutras and fixed Patanjali 
May 2024 | Added missing parts of Descartes' Principia Philosophia and Treatise on Man
May 2024 | Added Ethics by Aristotle
June 20, 2024 | Added Descartes' Meteors


