---
heading: Section 2
linkTitle: Prop 1
title: "Proposition 1 Theorem 1"
c: "firebrick"
description: "We simplify Principlia Mathematica"
icon: "Newton"
weight: 4
---


## Proposition 1 Theorem 1

<!-- The areas, which  describe by radii drawn to  -->

From an immovable centre of force with revolving bodies, draw radii to plot the areas.   
- These areas are proportional to the times in which they are drawn.

<!--  described.

do lie in the same immovable planes, and  -->

Suppose the time is divided into equal parts.

- In Time 1, the body by its innate force draws the right line `AB`.
- In Time 2, the body, by Law 1, goes directly to `C` along the line `Bc` equal to `AB`.

So the radii `AS, BS, cS`, drawn to the centre, would also draw the equal areas `ASB, BSc`.

But when the body is at `B`, suppose that a centripetal force acts on it.

It turns the body from the right line `Bc` along the right line `BC`.

Draw `cC` parallel to `BS` meeting `BC` in `C`.

At the end of the second part of the time, the body (by Cor. I. of the Laws) will be found in `C`, in the same plane with the triangle `ASB`.

Join `SC`. 

`SB` and `Cc` are parallel. And so the triangle `SBC` will be equal to the triangle `SBc` and `SAB`. 

By the like argument, if the centripetal force acts successively in C, D, E. &c.; and makes the body, in each single particle of time, to describe the right lines CD, DE, EF, &c., they will all lie in the same plane; and the triangle SCD will be equal to the triangle SBC, and SDE to SCD, and SEF to SDE. And therefore, in equal times, equal areas are described in one immovable plane: and, by composition, any sums SADS, SAFS, of those areas, are one to the other as the times in which they are described. Now let the number of those triangles be augmented, and their breadth diminished in infinitum; and (by Cor. 4, Lem. III.) their ultimate perimeter ADF will be a curve line: and therefore the centripetal force, by which the body is perpetually drawn back from the tangent of this curve, will act continually; and any described areas SADS, SAFS, which are always proportional to the times of description, will, in this case also, be proportional to those times.   Q.E.D.

Cor. 1. The velocity of a body attracted towards an immovable centre, in spaces void of resistance, is reciprocally as the perpendicular let fall from that centre on the right line that touches the orbit. For the velocities in those places A, B, C, D, E, are as the bases AB, BC, CD, DE, EF, of equal triangles; and these bases are reciprocally as the perpendiculars let fall upon them.

Cor. 2. If the chords AB, BC of two arcs, successively described in equal times by the same body, in spaces void of resistance, are completed into a parallelogram ABCV, and the diagonal BV of this parallelogram; in the position which it ultimately acquires when those arcs are diminished in infinitum, is produced both ways, it will pass through the centre of force.

Cor. 3. If the chords AB, BC, and DE, EF, of arcs described in equal times, in spaces void of resistance, are completed into the parallelograms ABCV, DEFZ; the forces in B and E are one to the other in the ultimate ratio of the diagonals BV, EZ, when those arcs are diminished in infinitum. For the motions BC and EF of the body (by Cor. 1 of the Laws) are compounded of the motions Bc, BV, and Ef, EZ: but BV and EZ, which are equal to Cc and Ff, in the demonstration of this Proposition, were generated by the impulses of the centripetal force in B and E, and are therefore proportional to those impulses.

Cor. 4. The forces by which bodies, in spaces void of resistance, are drawn back from rectilinear motions, and turned into curvilinear orbits, are one to another as the versed sines of arcs described in equal times; which versed sines tend to the centre of force, and bisect the chords when those arcs are diminished to infinity. For such versed sines are the halves of the diagonals mentioned in Cor. 3.

Cor. 5. And therefore those forces are to the force of gravity as the said versed sines to the versed sines perpendicular to the horizon of those parabolic arcs which projectiles describe in the same time.

Cor. 6. And the same things do all hold good (by Cor. 5 of the Laws), when the planes in which the bodies are moved, together with the centres of force which are placed in those planes, are not at rest, but move uniformly forward in right lines.

