---
heading: Proposition 7
title: "Projecticle"
description: "Make a body move in a trajectory that revolves around the center of force in the same way as another body in the same trajectory at rest"
author: Newton
draft: true
c: "firebrick"
---


### Lemma 2

The moment of any genitum is equal to the moments of each of the generatinrr sides drawn into the indices of the powers of those sides, and
into their co-efficients continually.
I call any quantity a genitum which is not made by addition or subduction of divers parts, but is generated or produced in arithmetic by the
multiplication, division, or extraction of the root of any terms whatsoever

geometry by the invention of contents and sides, or of the extremes and
means of proportionals. Quantities of this kind are products, quotients,
roots, rectangles, squares, cubes, square and cubic sides, and the like.
in
These quantities
I
here consider as variable and indetermined, and increas
ing or decreasing, as it were, by a perpetual motion or flux
stand their momentaneous increments or decrements by the
ments
;
so that the increments
moments
;
may
;
and
I
name
under
of
mo
be esteemed as added or affirmative
and the decrements as subducted or negative
ones.
But take
Finite particles are not
care not to look upon finite particles as such.
are to
but
the
moments.
the
moments,
very quantities generated by
We
Nor do
conceive them as the just nascent principles of finite magnitudes.
we in this Lemma regard the magnitude of the moments, but their firsf262

It will be the same proportion, as nascent.
thing, if, instead of moments,
we use either the velocities of the increments and decrements (which may
also be called the motions, mutations, and fluxions of
quantities), or any
finite quantities proportional to those velocities.
generating side is the quantity
ihat
which
The
co-efficient of
any
genitum to
arises by applying the
side.
Wherefore the sense of the
Lemma
moments
that if the
is,
of
any quan
A, B, C, &c., increasing or decreasing by a perpetual flux, or the
velocities of the mutations which are proportional to them, be called a, 6,
B
r, (fee., the moment or mutation of the generated rectangle AB will be
tities
-h b
A
;
the
ABC will be aBC -f b AC 4
the moments of the generated powers A 2 A
A A A A
A 2 A * will be 2aA, 3a A 4aA |A
*, fA*
moment
of the generated content
-1
cAB; and

respectively; and
aA n -^. Also,
that the moment of the generated quantity A B will be 2aAB 4- bA~ the
3
moment of the generated quantity A B C will be 3A 2 B C 2 +
in general, that the
moment
of any
power A^,
will be
^
2
;
3
2
4
4
4/&amp;gt;A
B 3 C 2 4-2cA 3 B C;
A B
2
will be
and the moment of the generated quantity
3aA 2 B
2bA 3 B
2
3
3
or
The Lemma
and so on.
;
A
is
thus demonstrated.
CASE
rectangle, as
wanted of the sides
yet, there
\b, or
\a into
1.
A
sides
AB, augmented by
Any
B
B are
A and
A 4- 4-a
A
AB
B
B
and
a
half their
a perpetual flux, when, as
moments \a and
\b,
was
A+
\ab ; but as soon as the
\b
half
the
other
moments, the rectangle be
augmented by
A
AB
From this
B 4- \b, or
-f \ab.
-f ^a B 4- \b
will
there
remain
and
the exces.?
former
the
rectangle,
rectangle subduct
aE -f bA. Therefore with the whole increments a and b of the sides, tin
comes
increment
aB
into
+
f&amp;gt;A
of the rectangle
Suppose AB
or GC (by
aB + bA for G and
CASE
content
same
2.
ABC
for contents
CASE
3.
*),
is
Q.K.D.
generated.
then
the moment of the
and
G,
equal to
always
Case 1) will
aBC
-h
under ever so
+
be^C
bAC
many
4-
cAB.
sides.
cG, that
And
AB and
is the
is
(putting
the reasoning

Suppose the sides A, B, and C, to be always equal among them
of A 2 that is, of the rectangle AB,
moment B +
and the moment aBC + bAC + cAB of A 3 that is, of the
will be 2aA
2
And by the same reasoning the moment of
content ABC, will be 3aA
n
n
is naA

any power
selves; and the

### CASE 4.

Therefore since
-7
A
into
A
is 1,
the
moment
of
-r-
A
drawn
intoSEC.
OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY.
11.]
A, together with
A
drawn
Therefore the moment of
T- into
A n
A n
!
naA&quot;
is
will be
#A
n
to B
And
a
-r
is
,
A
since
(by Case 3)
drawn into
of
or
tib
A
is,
nothing.
generally since
together with
moment
2
t
.
into
A
2
.
is
of
-r-
A
into
A n
n
A
or
and, therefore, the
;
moment
of
i
A 1
A, the moment of
A 7
drawn
into
2 A 2
will be n~r~r or
^A-j
to B,
!
,
And
.
A n
therefore, the
And,
And, generally, putting A~^ equal
n
and therefore maA m
equal to nbB
?tbB
that
1,
.A
.
,
of
Q-E.D.
T^~7-
5.
moment
A.


### CASE 5
A
moment
the
A
or of
-r,
will be nothing.
be
will
I,
into a. will be the
263
^
i
an&amp;lt;
5
therefore
ri
a A
,
^~
is
A m will
and ma A
then
equal to
&,
be equal
that
equal to
is,
equal
moment of A^.

### CASE 6

Therefore the moment of any generated quantity A m B n is the moment of A m drawn into B n together with the moment of B n drawn into
n
that is, maA m
A m and that whether the indices
-f- nbB
in arid n of the powers be whole numbers or fractions, affirmative or neg
And the reasoning is the same for contents under more powers.
ative.
to the


### Corollary 

Henoe in quantities continually proportional, if one term is
moments of the rest of the terms will be as the same terms mul
the
number of intervals between them and the given term. Let
by
1.
given, the
tiplied
D
E, F, be continually proportional
A, B, C,
the moments of the rest of the terms will be
;
;
then
if the
term
C
is
given,
themselves as
2A,
D, 2E, 3F.
COR. 2. And if in four proportionals the two means are given, the mo
ments of the extremes will be as those extremes. The same is to be un
B
among
?
derstood of the sides of any given rectangle.

### Corollary 3 If the sum or difference of two squares
ments of the sides will be reciprocally as the sides.
is
given, the
mo

## SCHOLIUM

In a letter of mine to Mr. /. Collins, dated December 10, 1672, having
method of tangents, which I suspected to be the same with
described a
Slusius*s method, which at that time wag not made public, I subjoined these
This is one particular, or rather a Corollary, of a general nte
words264


which extends
itself, without any troublesome calculation, not ojdy
drawing of tangents to any curve lines, whether geometrical or
mechanical, or any how respecting right lines or other cnrves, but also
thod,
to the
to the
resolving other abstrnser kinds of problems about the crookedness,
areas, lengths, centres of gravity of curves, &c.
;
nor is
(as Hudd^ri s
it
method de Maximis & Minimia) limited to equations which are free from
surd quantities. This method I have interwoven with that other oj
working in equations, by reducing them to infinite serie?. So far that
And
letter.
these last words relate to a treatise I composed on that sub
The foundation of that general method is contain
ject in the year 1671.
ed in the preceding
Lemma.