---
title: "The X17 Atomki Anomaly"
date: 2025-05-07
image: /graphics/physics/x17.jpg
description: "Timaeus explains the X17 particle and predicts one for protons"
writer:
  name: Juan
  url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/jundalisay/
icon: "Juan"
weight: 5
---



In 2016, the Atomki Institute discovered the X17 particle, having a mass of 17 MeV, from collisions with Beryllium.

This was validated in 2019 with Helium.

X17 is around 242,000 times heavier than the electron neutrino just as the Higgs boson is 245,000 times heavier than the electron.

This consistent ratio means that X17 is the Higgs for the Weak Force, validating the 4 Forces model of Timaeus which is the basis for Descartes' Physics.

It is NOT the 5th Force which is the aether.

This is because each of the Forces has a middle point to keep their mutual proportions, proving that they are part of a single system or unity.


## The Middle Boundary

The Higgs is the middle that separates mass from massless electromagnetic particles just as X17 separates the left-hand-interacting and non-left-hand-interacting weak particles.

This means that X17 comes from the neutron which, in Descartes' Physics, is part of the Weak Force or 4th Element (Water in Greek and Asian Physics).

By extending the ratio, we predict that a larger collider will expose a particle with 482 GeV mass which separates mesons and protons for the Strong Force or Earth Element.

{{< i s="/graphics/physics/x17.jpg" a="X17" >}}


Physics will then wrongly call it as dark matter when it is really just as useless as the Higgs.

It follows that the Future Circular Collider being built at a cost of $17b is a sheer waste of money. It is merely an expensive project to keep physicists employed in the Religion of Physics, just as a huge cathedral keeps priests employed.

Since the ratio holds for all Elements, then we apply it to outer space (as the Air Element) and assign the edge of the universe as the middle between visible and invisible universe.

It predicts that an edge of 93 billion light years in diameter will have galaxy-particles (vortices in Descartes Physics) sized at around 300,000 light years across.

Accordingly, this is what is found.Unlike the lower Elements which are based on mass and energy, the upper Elements are based on size and scope.

Increasing the detection farther beyond the edge of the universe will lead to the discovery of larger galaxies which then increases the average galaxy size, keeping with the ratio.

This actually happened with the James Webb Space Telescope which uncovered a lot of huge galaxies which were not supposed to exist.


## Helps Expose the Aetherspace

This fact is useful in detecting the properties of the aetherspace which is the Air Element part of the invisible universe that is connected to the aether or 5th Element.

The aetherspace facilitates levitation and teleportation and is the only means to bypass contact forces and travel to other galaxies (space) and timelines as time travel (time).

It also helps us complete our Medium-Substance-Quantum model which is our alternative to the Standard Model of Physics.

{{< i s="/graphics/physics/msq.svg" a="MSQ model" >}}


