---
heading: "Chapter 9d"
title: "The Chakras as the Enabler of Ideas and Feelings"
date: 2023-12-08
weight: 612
image: /photos/meta/chakras.jpg
description: "Chakras"
writer:
  name: Juan
  url: https://www.linkedin.com/in/jundalisay/
icon: "Juan"
---


Both feelings and ideas are waves which all come from and are generated by the Supreme Entity. 

But how do we actually get those feelings and ideas? 


Chapter 1 explained that a mind is a node where other wave-feelings and wave-nodes go through. 


{{< i s="/graphics/physics/exist.jpg" a="Chakra is inbound vortex" >}}

Operationally, these nodes manifest as vortices that allow other waves and vortices to go through them.


In the physical domain, space takes the form of slices that are separated by the aether which manifests as either:
- dark energy or macro aetherspace
- atomic space or aetherspace
- gluon field or micro aetherspace

A vortex that lets the aether into a spacetime slices is called an inbound vortex. 

This is called:
- chakra in Hinduism
- dantian in Taoism
- a black hole in Physics

<!-- , Xià Dāntián): at the crossing of the horizontal line behind the Ren-6 acupoint and vertical line above the perineum, which is also called "the golden stove" (金炉 pinyin: Jīn lú) or the namesake "elixir-of-life field" proper, where the process of developing the elixir by refining and purifying essence (jing) into vitality (qi) begins.[7]
, Zhōng Dāntián): at the level of the heart, which is also called "the crimson palace", associated with storing spirit (shen) and with respiration and health of the internal organs, in particular the thymus gland. This cauldron is where vitality or qi is refined into shen or spirit.[8]
, Shàng Dāntián): at the forehead between the eyebrows or third eye, which is also called "the muddy pellet", associated with the pineal gland. This cauldron is where shen or spirit is transmuted into wu wei or emptiness -->

A vortex that lets the contents of a slice exit and go to other spacetime slices is called an outbound vortex. 
- This is called a "portal" to other dimensions.


{{< i s="/graphics/super/chakra.jpg" a="Chakra is inbound vortex" >}}


## Inbound Vortices

Each chakra or black hole has a specific configuration that detemines that energies and particles, as the feelings and ideas of the Supreme, for that spot of space.
- a strong, large black hole will result in large or bright galaxy
- a strong, large chakra will result in a strong behavior in a person or animal


{{< i s="/graphics/physics/exist.jpg" a="Chakra is inbound vortex" >}}


A common example of an inbound vortex is a typhoon that gathers the energy from the atmosphere and concentrates it around the eye. A galaxy is like a typhoon that fizzles out after spending all its energy.  

{{< i s="/graphics/physics/hurricane.jpg" a="Hurricane is a vortex" >}}


Galaxies and typhoons are inbound vortices in the physical domain. The common vortices in the metaphysical domain are DNA and chakras.

There are 7 chakras listed by the Hindus, and 3 by the Taoists.

Number | Name | Chinese | Layer 
--- | --- | --- | ---
1 | Base |  | Earth
2 | Sex |  | Water
3 | Navel | Lower dantian 下丹田  | Fire
4 | Heart | Middle dantian 中丹田 | Air
5 | Throat | | Aether
6 | Third Eye | Upper dantian 上丹田 | Astral
7 | Crown | | Essential


{{< i s="/photos/meta/chakras.jpg" a="Chakras" >}}


Each chakra lets a specific range of propensities flow through from potentiality to actuality. The mixing and variation of these propensities lead to the different feelings of humans.


Chakra | Propensities
--- | --- 
Base | survival, security, materialism, sensual desires
Sex | Affection, Pitilessness, All-destructiveness, Delusion, Despising oneself, Suspicion
Navel | Spiritual ignorance, Thirst, Jealousy, Treachery, Shame, Fear, Disgust, Delusion, Foolishness, Sadness
Heart | Hope, Anxiety, Effort, Indecision, Repentance, Possessiveness, Impartiality, Arrogance, Discrimination, Deflation, Lamentation, Fraudulence
Throat | Purification, expression, creativity
Third Eye | Intuition, command, insight
Crown | Liberation, transcendence


These chakras are the intersection between the human oversoul and the individual soul. 

The differences in range of feelings and expression of different species is based on the differences in the oversoul of each species. 

Similarly, the similarities in the feelings among all humans is from the human species being a single oversoul. 

The differences in each person is due to the individual soul. 




{{< q a="Swami Vivekananda" c="Kundalini Tantra, Chapter 10" >}}
A 45 year old Piscean had a another type of depression after her husband had left her when she was about 35. She was still pretty energized in swadhisthana chakra, as Pisceans tend to be. She was describing this anxiety that she had. It was a sort of quivering vibration in the pelvis around the area of swadhisthana chakra. This created the anxiety. I gave her the general swadhisthana practices like shalabhasana, etc. She improved a lot. I think it was just sexual tension that she had in that area and she was perceiving it as anxiety. 
{{< /q >}}


