---
title: "THE ACTION OF RAYS OF POLARIZEDLIGHT UPON EACH OTHER*"
date: 2023-05-30
weight: 30
description: ""
contributors: ['Fresnel']
draft: true
c: "firebrick"
---


1. Dr. Thomas Young has already skillfully studied the effects which rays of light exert upon each other.

First. Two rays of homogeneous light coming from the same source and reaching a certain point in space by paths whichare different and slightly unequal in length, either strengthenone another or annul one another, and produce upon the re- ceiving screen a bright or a dark point according as the differ- ence of path has one value or another.

Second. Two rays always intensify each other at any pointtor which their paths are equal ; if their intensities are addedfoi another point where the difference of path is equal to aquantity d, their intensities will be added also for all differ- ences of path included in the series 2d, 3d, etc. The intermediate values 0-f J^, d+\d, 2d+%d, etc., represent the points inwhich the rays annul each other. 

Third. The quantity d does not have the same value for all homogeneous rays. In air its value for the extreme red rays ofthe spectrum is TTrffoo- mm., while for violet rays it is onlyTFii_ mm. For other colors the corresponding values are in- termediate between these which we have just given.

The periodicity of color which is seen in Newton's rings, in* [Annale* de Chimie et de Physique, t. x., p. 288 (1819).] K 145 halos, etc., seems to depend upon the influence exerted uponone another by rays whose paths at first diverge, and later areso inclined as to again meet ; but in order to bring these vari-ous phenomena into harmony with the laws just stated, we areforced to adm.it that difference of path alone is not sufficientto determine the mutual action of two rays at their point ofmeeting except when they are both travelling in the samemedium ; and it must be recognized also that differences of re-fractive index, or thickness in the transparent bodies traversedby the respective rays, produce the same effect as differenceof path. In this journal, vol. i., p. 199, there is described adirect experiment due to M. Arago, which shows the samething, and proves also that a transparent body diminishes thespeed of light traversing it in the ratio of the sine of the angleof incidence to the sine of the angle of refraction ; so that inall the phenomena of interference * two different media producesimilar effects when their thicknesses are in inverse ratio totheir refractive indices. These considerations at once suggesta new method for measuring slight differences of refrangibility.

2. While we were trying to determine what accuracy wasattainable by this method, one of us (M. Arago) thought thatit would be interesting to find out whether the actions whichordinary rays exert one upon another were in any way modified when two previously polarized pencils of light were madeto interfere. 

We know that if a narrow body be illuminatedby light coming from a point-source, its shadow is borderedon the outside by a series of fringes produced by the interfer-ence of the direct light with the rays inflected near the opaquebody. It is known also that a part of this same light, passinginto the geometrical shadow from the two opposite sides of thebody, there gives rise to fringes of the same kind.


These two systems of fringes are absolutely the same, whether the incident lighthas received no modification whatever, or whether it has beenpolarized previous to incidence. Rays which are polarized, inone plane, therefore mutually affect one another in the samemanner as rays of ordinary light.

* This is the name which Mr. Youug has given to the phenomena pro-duced by the meeting of two or more rays of light. 146

3. It was still to be determined whether two rays originally polarized at right angles would not produce phenomena of the same kind when they met inside the geometrical shadow of anopaque body. For this purpose we placed in front of thepoint -source* sometimes a rhomb of calc-spar, sometimes anachromatic prism of rock crystal, and thus obtained two lumi-nous points. In each case we had a divergent pencil, and'thesetwo pencils were polarized at right angles. 

Behind the two radiant points and midway of the space between them wasplaced a cylinder of metal. In this manner a part of the polarized light from the first pencil reached the interior of theshadow via the right-hand side of the cylinder; while a partof the light from the second pencil, polarized in a plane at right angles to the first, entered the shadow from the left-hand side
of the cylinder.  

Some of these rays met along the line joiningthe centre of the cylinder and the middle point of the straight
line drawn from one luminous point to the other. Here theserays had traversed equal paths, and one might expect them to produce fringes. 

On the contrary, not the slightest trace of fringes could be seen, even with a magnifying-glass. In fact, the rays here cross without either affecting the other. Theonly fringes which make their appearance in this experimentarise from the interference of rays which come from only oneof the radiant points and enter the shadow from each side of the cylinder. Those which we tried to produce by the inter- ference of rays polarized at right angles to each other would haveoccupied a position intermediate between those just mentioned.Since the images which we employed were not very widelyseparated, the thicknesses of crystal traversed by the ordinary
and the extraordinary rays must have been very nearly equal.

Nevertheless, similar experiments have already shown us, only too frequently, how sensitive the phenomena of interferenceare to the slightest difference of speed in the rays, to thelength of path, and to the refractive index of the medium. Noargument was needed, therefore, to convince us of the necessity of repeating these experiments under conditions whichwould eliminate these various sources of inaccuracy. This hasbeen attempted by each of us.
* For all the experiments described in this paper our source of light wasthe focus of a small magnifying-glass.147


4. M. Fresnel at once devised two distinctly different methods. The principle of interference shows us that pencils oflight from two luminous points, originally from a single pointsource, produce bright and dark bands at points of intersectioneven though no opaque body be interposed. (See Annales deChimie et de Physique, t. i., p. 332.)

To solve the problem it is then only necessary to determinewhether, when two images are produced by placing a rhombofcalc-spar in front of a luminous point, they will behave in thissame way ; but since, from the theory of double refraction,we know that the extraordinary ray traverses carbonate oflime more rapidly than the ordinary ray, it becomes necessaryto compensate this extra speed before the two rays are allowedto intersect. In order to accomplish this a method was employed which has been described by M. Arago in this journal,vol i., p. 199. M. Fresnel placed in the path of the extraor-dinary pencil alone a plate of glass whose thickness had beendetermined by computation in such a way that, under perpendicular incidence, this pencil lost nearly all the ground which,in the crystal, it had gained over the ordinary ray. 

By slightlyinclining the plate the compensation could be made exact. Inspite of these precautions, the two rays, polarized at rightangles, gave not the slightest trace of interference bands. In another experiment, M. Fresnel compensated for the dif-ference of speed in the two rays by allowing them each to fallupon a small unsilvered mirror whose thickness had been socomputed that the extraordinary ray, when reflected at the sec-ond face, lost by twice traversing the glass more than it hadgained in traversing the crystal ; a gradual inclination of theplate brought about complete compensation.
Under no angle of incidence, however, would the ordinaryrays, reflected at the first surface, interfere with the rays re-flected from the second surface to produce bands.

5. In order to avoid the theoretical consideration introducedinto the preceding experiment, and to maintain the originalintensity of the light, M. Fresnel adopted the following method : A rhombohedron of calc-spar was sawed through the middle, and the two parts were placed one in front of the otherwith their principal sections at right angles. In this position,the ordinary ray from the first crystal was refracted as an ex-traordinary ray in the second ; while, conversely, the extraordinary ray in the first crystal suffered ordinary refraction inthe second. On viewing a luminous point through this combination, one sees only a double image. Each pencil has ex-perienced in succession the two kinds of refraction. The sumof the paths of each pencil through the two crystals ought,therefore, to be equal, since by hypothesis the crystals havethe same thickness ; so that everything is compensated, bothas regards speed and length of path. Nevertheless, two systemsof rays polarized at right angles never gave rise to any interfer- ence fringes. Lest the two parts of the rhombohedron did nothave quite the same thickness, we took pains in each test to vary slightly and slowly the angle of incidence at the face ofthe second crystal.

6. The method devised by M. Arago for solving this sameproblem was independent of double refraction. It has beenknown for a long time that if one cuts two very narrow slits close together in a thin screen arid illuminates them by asingle luminous point, there will be produced behind thescreen a series of bright bands resulting from the meeting ofthe rays passing through the right-hand slit with those passingthrough the left. In order to polarize at right angles the rayspassing through these two apertures, M. Arago at first thoughtof using a thin piece of agate, sawed through the middle andplaced one piece in front of each slit, in such a way that theedges formerly meeting along the line of the cut are now atright angles to each other. This arrangement ought certainlyto produce the effect expected. But not having at hand asuitable piece of agate, M. Arago proposed to supply its placeby two piles of plates, of proper thickness, built up from sheetsof mica.

For this purpose we selected fifteen plates as clear as possi-ble and superposed them. This pile was next cut in two byuse of a sharp tool. So that now we had two piles of plates ofalmost exactly the same thickness, at least in those parts bor-dering on the line of bisection ; and this would be true even if the component plates had been perceptibly wedge-shaped.The light transmitted by these plates was almost completelypolarized when the angle of incidence was about thirty degrees.And it was exactly 'at this angle that the plates were inclinedwhen they were placed in front of the slits in the copperscreen.

When the two planes of incidence were parallel, i. e., whenthe plates were inclined in -the same direction, up and down,for instance, one could very distinctly see the interferencebands produced by the two polarized pencils. In fact, they be-have exactly as two rays of ordinary light. But if one of thepiles be rotated about the incident ray until the two planes ofincidence are at right angles to each other, the first pile, say,remaining inclined up and down while the second is inclinedfrom right to left, then the two emergent pencils will be polarized at right angles to each other and will not, on meeting,produce any interference bands.
The pains we took to make these two piles of equal thick-ness would indicate that we also took care in placing them be-fore the slits to have the light traverse those parts which wereoriginally contiguous. But all difficulties of this kind arereally solved by the fact that the two rays when polarized in thesame plane interfere like ordinary light. Moreover, we couldnot produce interference by slowly and gradually changing theinclination of one of the plates so long as the planes of inci-dence were at right angles.

7. The same day that we tried the combination of these twopiles we also tried an experiment suggested by M. Fresnel^ anexperiment which, it must be confessed, is less direct than thepreceding, but which is also more easily performed and whichdemonstrates equally well the impossibility of producing fringesby bringing together rays polarized at right angles to eachother. In front of a sheet of copper in which are cut two slits weplaced, for instance, a thin plate of selenite. 

Since this is adoubly refracting crystal, there will be two pencils of lightpolarized at right angles passing through each slit. Nowif rays polarized in one plane can affect rays polarized in a planeat right angles, we should expect with this arrangement to seethree distinct systems of fringes. The ordinary rays from theright-hand slit would combine with the ordinary rays from theleft-hand slit to form a first system symmetrical with respectto the line bisecting the space between the two slits.

The bands formed by the two extraordinary pencils would fall inthe same position as the preceding, increasing their intensity,but remaining indistinguishable from them. As to those whichwould result from the action of the ordinary rays from the right upon the extraordinary from the left, and conversely, it is clear that they would form a system to the right and to theleft of the central band. The distance of either of these sys-tems from the centre would increase with the thickness of theplate, for, as we have seen, difference of speed is quite as ef- fective as difference of path in shifting the position of fringes.Now, since the fringes in the centre are the only ones visible, even though the plate of selenite be so thin as not to shift theother two systems very much, we must conclude that rays oflight polarized at right angles do not affect one another.


8. In order to verify this conclusion, suppose that we cutthe selenite plate in two, and that we place one half in frontof the first slit and the other half in front of the other slit; and instead of placing their axes parallel as in the case of asingle plate, let us put them at right angles to each other. Inthis way the ordinary ray coming through the right-hand slit will be polarized in the same plane as the extraordinary rayfrom the left-hand slit, and vice versa. These rays will thenform fringes ; but their speeds in the crystal will not be equal,and they will not lie symmetrically about the middle of thespace between the two slits. Central fringes will be producedonly by ordinary or extraordinary rays from the one slit meetingrays from the other slit which are polarized in the same plane.But when the two parts of crystal are arranged as we havehere supposed them, those rays which are polarized at rightangles to each other ought not to affect one another. Onewould, therefore, see simply the first two systems of fringesseparated by an interval of white or of some uniform shade. [An unimportant foot-note is here omitted.]

If, without changing the experiment in any other respect,we simply set the two plates of selenite so that their axes makean angle of 45 instead of 90, we should at once see threesystems of fringes ; for now, since their planes of polarizationare no longer at right angles, each pencil from the right will in- terfere with the two pencils from the left, and vice versa. It should be observed also that the middle system is the most in- tense, resulting, as it does, from the exact superposition of in- terference bands of polarized pencils of the same kind.


9. Let us return to the combination of the two piles andimagine that the planes of incidence are mutually perpendicular,so that the two pencils are polarized at risjht angles to each other. Between the copper screen and the eye place a doublyrefracting crystal in such a way that its principal sectionmakes an angle of 45 with the planes of incidence.

In accordance with the well-known laws of double refraction, therays which are transmitted by the piles will afterwards, in pass- ing through the crystal, each be divided into two others. These two will be of equal intensity, will be polarized in planeswhich are mutually perpendicular, and one of these planes will coincide with the principal section of the crystal. One mighttherefore expect to see, in this experiment, one series offringes due to the meeting of the ordinary pencil from theright with the ordinary pencil from the left, and a second se- ries similar to the preceding, but arising from the interferenceof the two extraordinary pencils. Such, however, is not thecase ; for these four pencils meet and produce only a uniformillumination, showing not the slightest interference.*

This experiment shows that two rays originally polarized atright angles to each other may subsequently be brought intothe same plane of polarization without again acquiring thepower of interference.


10. In order to produce interference between two rays polarized at right angles and afterwards reduced to the sameplane it is necessary that they should originally have been polarized in one and the same plane. This is shown by the fol- lowing experiment, which was devised by M. Fresnel. A plate of selenite, backed with a sheet of copper in whichtwo apertures have been made, is illuminated by a pencil of polarized light coming from a point-source and striking theselenite plate at perpendicular incidence. 

The axis of theplate makes an angle of 45 with the original plane of polarization. As in all similar experiments the shadow of the copperscreen is observed with a magnifying-glass ; but in this case* If the plate interposed between the copper screen and the eye were so thin as to only slightly separate the two images, one might explain the ab- sence of interference as follows : viz., suppose the two systems of bandsare superposed in such a fashion that the bright bands of one systemcoincide with the dark bands of the other system, and vice versa. But the
insufficiency of this explanation is shown by placing a rhombohedron of Iceland spar between the eye and the preceding crystal. In certain posi- tions this Iceland spar separates the two systems of bands, because they
are polarized at right angles. But even under these circumstances onesees no trace of bands. 

a rhombohedron of Iceland spar, in which [the separation ofimages due to] double refraction is perceptible, is placed in front of the focus. The principal section of the Iceland spar makes an angle of 45 with that of the plate of selenite. Accordingly we find in each image three systems of fringes, one falling exactly in the
middle of the shaoow, the others being situated on the right
and left respectively.

Let us now consider one of these two images, say the or- dinary, and see what gives rise to these three systems of bands.

The pencils which pass through the two slits are polarized
in the same plane, but on emergence from the plate of selenite they are divided into two pencils polarized at right angles.

Since double refraction in this plate is inappreciable, the or- dinary and extraordinary pencils each follow practically thesame route, though with different speeds.

Each of these double pencils, say the one from the right-handslit, will be divided, in passing through the Iceland spar, into fourpencils, two ordinary and two extraordinary ; but, as a matter of
fact, one will see only two, since components in the same planewill coincide. It is also evident, from the well-known laws of double refraction and from the relative positions of the selenite and the Iceland spar, that at emergence from this latter crystal the ordinary pencil will be composed partly of the raywhich "was ordinary in the selenite and partty of the ray whichwas extraordinary ; while the other two components of thesesame rays go to form the extraordinary image which we are not now considering. The pencil which emerges from the left- hand slit behaves in the same way. We see, in fact, that theordinary pencil coming either from the right or left hand slit will, after traversing the two crystals in this new instrument,be composed partly of light which has followed the ordinarypath in each crystal and partly of light which started out as anextraordinary ray. Eays coming from the two slits and following the ordinarypath through each of the two crystals will have traversed routes of the same length and with the same speed. On meeting, they ought, therefore, to give rise to central bands. Thesame is true of rays which have pursued the extraordinarypath both in the selenite and in the Iceland spar. 

The bands in the middle of the shadow result, therefore, from the superposition of these two different systems.
Now- as to that portion of light from the right-hand slit which has traversed the selenite as an extraordinary ray, forinstance, but passed the Iceland spar as an ordinary ray, it is evident that it will have traversed a path which in length is equal to that of the left-hand pencil which made the wholetrip as an ordinary ray. But since in the selenite the speedsare different, those points where they meet to form fringes will not lie symmetrically between the two slits, but will be shiftedto the right, i. e., to the side opposite the ray which for awhile travelled as an extraordinary ray, but now travels moreslowly. Finally, as a last combination, we have interferencebetween that component of the right-hand pencil which trav-ersed both crystals as an ordinary ray and that component ofthe left-hand pencil which in the selenite was an extraordinaryray and in the Iceland spar an ordinary ray. This interfer-ence gives rise to a system of bands situated on the left of thecentre. We have now explained the paths of the rays which meet toform the three systems of fringes in the experiment under discussion. And it may be remarked that the right and left systemswere produced by the interference of rays which were previously polarized at right angles in the selenite and afterwards re- duced to the same plane in the Iceland spar. Two rays polar-ized at right angles and later reduced to the same plane-of polarization can, then, meet and produce interference bands; but for this purpose it is an essential condition that the raysshould ORIGINALLY have been polarized in the same plane.

So far we have not considered the interaction of the twopencils which suffered extraordinary refraction in the Icelandspar. These pencils also furnish three systems of bands, butthey are separated from the others. If we allow all the conditions of the experiment to remain the same, except that wesubstitute for the Iceland spar a plate of selenite or quartz which does not give two distinct images, the six systems, in- stead of being reduced to three by superposition, will result in one central system. This remarkable fact shows, first, that the fringes resulting from the interference of the ordinaryrays are complementary to those produced by the interferenceof the extraordinary rays ; and, secondly, that these two systems are so located that a bright band in the one system corre-sponds to a dark band in the other system. Were these twoconditions not satisfied, one would not find uniform and con-tinuous illumination on each side of the central fringes. Wemeet here, then, the same difference of half a wave-length thatis found in the phenomena of colored rings.
From the experiments just described we may, therefore, inferthe following facts : (1.) Two rays of light polarized at right angles do not pro-duce any effect upon each other under the same circumstancesin which two rays of ordinary light produce destructive inter- ference.
(2.) Rays of light polarized in the same plane interfere like rays of ordinary light ; so that in these two kinds of light thephenomena of interference are absolutely identical.
(3.) Two rays which were originally polarized at right angles may be brought to the same plane of polarization -withoutthereby acquiring the ability to interfere.
(4.) Two rays of light polarized at right angles and after- wards brought into the same plane of polarization interfere
like ordinary light provided they were originally polarized in the same plane.
(5.) In the phenomena of interference produced by rayswhich have experienced double refraction the position of theinterference bands is determined not only by difference of pathand difference of speed, but in some cases, as above indicated,
it is necessary to take into account also a difference of onehalf a wave-length.
All these laws are, as we have seen, based directly upon ex- perimental evidence. In starting from the phenomena of
crystalline plates, they can be derived more simply ; but thenwe have to assume that the colors of the plates when illumi- nated by polarized light are produced by the interference of several systems of waves. The evidence which we have just
presented has the advantage of establishing the same lawsquite independently of hypothesis.


AUGUSTIN JEAN FRESNEL was born in Normandy in 1788,and died near Paris in 1827. As a child he was quite the reverse of precocious ; but atthe age of sixteen he was ready to enter the Ecole Polytech-nique at Paris, where he received sound mathematical trainingand attracted to himself the attention of Legendre. His education was completed at the Ecole des Fonts et Ohausees wherehe received an engineer's training. Several years were nextspent in professional work in various parts of France. In 1816, through the influence of Arago, he received an ap-pointment in Paris, where he remained during the rest of hislife. When we recall that his first studies in optics date from1814, his accomplishments during the eleven years of his Parisresidence must ever fill us with wonder. New ideas were notonly rapidly acquired, but were also rapidly perfected. Theywere at once submitted to the test of experiment and as quickly received elegant mathematical description.
The wave-theory of light had lacked neither merit nor ablesupport ; Grimaldi, Hooke, Efuygens, and Young had been itsadvocates; but it was only in the hands of Fresnel that theproblem and its solution received such clear and simple state-ment as to command acceptance. The work of Fresnel lies ex-clusively in the domain of optics, each of his investigations fall-ing into one of two distinct groups, viz., the kinematics of lightand the dynamics of light.

His earlier papers deal with questions of diffraction, inter-ference, and polarization, in which the chief factors of the dis-cussion are displacements, velocities, and squares of velocitiesthe quantities of kinematics.
His later papers, however, refer more to the medium throughwhich luminous energy is transferred; they deal with the forcesof elasticity here brought into play, and seek to determine thespeed of light as a function of the mechanical properties of thematter through which the light travels ; they deal, in short,with the dynamics of light.
But the particular achievements with which the nameofFresnel must always be associated are

(1.) The introduction of the idea of transverse vibrations.
(2.) The combination of the principle of Huygens with that
of interference. An excellent and appreciative sketch of Fresnel will be
found in Arago's Notices BiograpMques, vol. i. It is here that he paraphrases Newton's remark concerning Cotes by saying "
que nous savons quelque chose quoique Fresnel ait peu vecu." Between the years 1866 and 1870 the French government
published the works of Fresnel in three worthy quarto vol- umes, ably edited by Senarmont, Verdet, and the author's
brother, Leonor Fresnel.