---
heading: "Enlightened"
title: "Spinoza"
description: "Spinoza was a philosopher who wrote about God as a pantheist substance. He is essential for Bio Superphysics"
a: "Spinoza"
c: "Indigo"
# date: 2022-04-15
weight: 198
draft: true
---



To collect photographs is to collect the world.

Movies and television programs light up 
walls, flicker, and go out; but with still pho
tographs the image is also an object, lightweight,
cheap to produce, easy to carry about, accumu
late, store. In Godard's Les Carabiniers (1963),
two sluggish lumpen-peasants are lured into
joining the King's Army by the promise that
they will be able to loot, rape, kill, or do what
ever else they please to the enemy, and get rich.
But the suitcase of booty that Michel-Ange and
Ulysse triumphantly bring home, years later, to
their wives turns out to contain only picture
postcards, hundreds of them, of Monuments,
Department Stores, Mammals, \X'onders of Na
ture, Methods of Transport, \X'orks of Art, and
other classified treasures from around the globe.
Godard's gag vividly parodies the equivocal
magic of the photographic image. 

Photographs
are perhaps the most mysterious of all the objects that make up, and thicken, the environ
ment we recognize as modern. Photographs really are experience captured, and the camera is
the ideal arm of consciousness in its acquisitive
mood.

To photograph is to appropriate the thing photographed. It means putting oneself into a
certain relation to the world that feels like
seems a less treacherous form of leaching out the
world, of turning it into a mental object, than
photographic images, which now provide most
of the knowledge people have about the look of
the past and the reach of the present. What is
written about a person or an event is frankly an
interpretation, as are handmade visual state
ments, like paintings and drawings. 

Photographed images do not seem to be statements
about the world so much as pieces of it, minia
tures of reality that anyone can make or acquire.

Photographs, which fiddle with the scale of
the world, themselves get reduced, blown up,
cropped, retouched, doctored, tricked out. They
age, plagued by the usual ills of paper objects;
they disappear; they become valuable, and get
bought and sold; they are reproduced. Pho
tographs, which package the world, seem to in
vite packaging. They are stuck in albums,
framed and set on tables, tacked on walls, pro
jected as slides. Newspapers and magazines fea
ture them; cops alphabetize them; museums ex
hibit them; publishers compile them.

For many decades the book has been the
most influential way of arranging (and usually
miniaturizing) photographs, thereby guarantee
ing them longevity, if not immortality-pho
tographs are fragile objects, easily torn or mis
tory scheme for putting groups of photographs
into general circulation. The sequence in which
the photographs are to be looked at is proposed
by the order of pages, but nothing holds readers
to the recommended order or indicates the
amount of time to be spent on each photograph.

Chris Marker's film, Si j'avais quatre dro
madaires (1966), a brilliantly orchestrated medi
tation on photographs of all sorts and themes,
suggests a subtler and more rigorous way of
packaging (and enlarging) still photographs.
Both the order and the exact time for looking at
each photograph are imposed; and there is a
gain in visual legibility and emotional impact.
But photographs transcribed in a film cease to
be collectible objects, as they still are when
served up in books.

Photographs furnish evidence. Something
we hear about, but doubt, seems proven when
we're shown a photograph of it. 

In one version
of its utility, the camera record incriminates.
Starting with their use by the Paris police in the
murderous roundup of Communards in June
1871, photographs became a useful tool of
modern states in the surveillance and control of
their increasingly mobile populations. 

In an
other version of its utility, the camera record jus
tifies . A photograph passes for incontrovertible
proof that a given thing happened. The picture
may distort; but there is always a presumption
that something exists, or did exist, which is like
what's in the picture. Whatever the limitations
(through amateurism) or pretensions (through
artistry) of the individual photographer, a photograph-any photograph-seems to have a
more innocent, and therefore more accurate, re
lation to visible reality than do other mimetic
objects. 

Virtuosi of the noble image like Alfred
Stieglitz and Paul Strand, composing mighty,
unforgettable photographs decade after decade,
still want, first of all, to show something "out
there," just like the Polaroid owner for whom
photographs are a handy, fast form of note-tak
ing, or the shutterbug with a Brownie who takes
snapshots as souvenirs of daily life.

While a painting or a prose description can
never be other than a narrowly selective interpretation, a photograph can be treated as a nar
rowly selective transparency. But despite the
presumption of veracity that gives all photographs authority, interest, seductiveness, the
work that photographers do is no generic excep
tion to the usually shady commerce between art
and truth . Even when photographers are most
concerned with mirroring reality, they are still
haunted by tacit imperatives of taste and con
science. 

The immensely gifted members of the
Farm Security Administration photographic
project of the late 1930s (among them Walker
Evans, Dorothea Lange, Ben Shahn, Russell Lee)
would take dozens of frontal pictures of one of
their sharecropper subjects until satisfied that
they had gotten just the right look on film-the
precise expression on the subject's face that sup
ported their own notions about poverty, light,
dignity, texture, exploitation, and geometry. 

In
deciding how a picture should look, in prefer
ring one exposure to another, photographers are
always imposing standards on their subjects. Al
though there is a sense in which the camera does
indeed capture reality, not just interpret it, pho
tographs are as much an interpretation of the
world as paintings and drawings are. Those occasions when the taking of photographs is rela
tively undiscriminating, promiscuous, or self
effacing do not lessen the didacticism of the
whole enterprise. This very passivity-and ubiq
uity-of the photographic record is photogra
phy's "message," its aggression.

Images which idealize (like most fashion
and animal photography) are no less aggressive
than work which makes a virtue of plainness
(like class pictures, still lifes of the bleaker sort,
and mug shots). There is an aggression implicit
in every use of the camera. This is as evident in
the 1840s and 1850s, photography's glorious
first two decades, as in all the succeeding
decades, during which technology made possible
an ever increasing spread of that mentality
which looks at the world as a set of pot ential
ical study done in France, most households have tographed so long as photographs get taken and
176 Part V • Image Technologies and the Emergence of Mass Society
photographs. Even for such early masters as
David Octavius Hill and Julia Margaret Cameron who used th e camera as a means of
getting painterly images, the point of taking
photographs was a vast departure from the aims
of painters. From its start, photograph y implied
the capture of the largest possible number of
subjects. Painting never had so imperial a scope.
The subsequent industrialization of camera tech
nology only carried out a promise inherent in
photography from its very beginning: to democ
ratize all experiences by translating them into
images.

Th at age when taking photographs required
a cumbersome and expensive contraption-the
toy of 'the clever, the wealth y, and the ob
se ssed-seems remote indeed from the era of
sleek pocket cam eras that invite anyone to take
pictures. The first cameras, made in France and
England in the early 1840s, had only inventors
and buffs to operate them. Since there were then
no professional photographers, there could not
be amateurs either, and ta king photographs had
no clear social use; it was a gratuitous, that is,
an artistic activity, though with few pretensions
to being an art. It was only with its industrializa
tion that photograph y came into its own as a rt.
As industrialization provided social uses for the
operations of the photog rapher, so the reaction
against these us es reinforced the self-conscious
ness of photograph y- as-art.
Recently, photography has become almost
as widely practiced an amusement as sex and
dancing-which means that, like every mass art
form, photogr a ph y is not practiced by most peo
ple as an art. It is mainly a social rite, a defense
against anxiety, and a tool of power.
Memorializing the achievements of individ
uals considered as members of families (as well
as of other groups) is the earliest popular use of
photograph y. For at least a century, the wedding
photograph has been as much a part of the cere
mony as the prescribed verbal formulas. Cam
eras go with family life. According to a sociolog
,
~.
r,'l" l~tc'lu~ F.l:u" ••• ",
THE EABTMAH DRY PLATE" FILM 00. ,116, Odord 8t., London, W.
26 7. /I ,h-(I"IISt'IIIOIt of th'·.first KoddJ:
{(mura, 1888
The Kodak . Early e ff orts to popularize the camera
used the instructional forms in magazine and news
pa per advertising. National Ar chives of Canada.
a camera, but a household with children is twice
as likely to have at least one camera as a house
hold in which there are no children. Not to take
pictures of one's children, particularly when
they are sm all, is a sign of parental indifference,
just as not turning up for one's graduation pic
tur e is a gesture of adolescent rebellion.
Through photographs, each family con
structs a portrait-chronicle of itself-a portable
kit of images that bears witness to its connected
ness. It hardly matters what activities are pho
are cherished. Photography becomes a rite of
family life just when, in the industrializing coun
tries of Europe and America, the very institution
of the family starts undergoing radical surgery .
As that claustrophobic unit, the nuclear family,
was being carved out of a much larger family
aggregate, photography came along to memori
alize, to restate symbolically, the imperiled con
tinuity and vanishing extendedness of family
life. Those ghostly traces, photographs, supply
the token presence of the dispersed relatives. A
family's photograph album is generally about
the extended family-and, often, is all that re
mains of it.
As photographs give people an imaginary
possession of a past that is unreal, they also help
people to take possession of space in which they
are insecure. Thus, photography develops in
tandem with one of the most characteristic of
modern activities: tourism. For the first time in
history, large numbers of people regularly travel
out of their habitual environments for short pe
riods of time. It seems positively unnatural to
travel for pleasure without taking a camera
along. Photographs will offer indisputable evi
dence that the trip was made, that the program
was carried out, that fun was had. Photographs
document sequences of consumption carried on
outside the view of family, friends, neighbors.
But dependence on the camera, as the device
that makes real what one is experiencing,
doesn't fade when people travel more. Taking
photographs fills the same need for the cos
mopolitans accumulating photograph-trophies
of their boat trip up the Albert Nile or their
fourteen days in China as it does for lower-mid
dle-class vacationers taking snapshots of the Eif
fel Tower or Niagara Falls.
A way of certifying experience, taking pho
tographs is also a way of refusing it-by limiting
experience to a search for the photogenic, by
converting experience into an image, a souvenir.
Travel becomes a strategy for accumulating
photographs. The very activity of taking pic
tures is soothing, and assuages general feelings
22 • On Photography 177
of disorientation that are likely to be exacer
bated by travel. Most tourists feel compelled to
put the camera between themselves and what
ever is remarkable that they encounter. Unsure
of other responses, they take a picture. This
gives shape to experience: stop, take a photo
graph, and move on. The method especially ap
peals to people handicapped by a ruthless work
ethic-Germans, Japanese, and Americans. Us
ing a camera appeases the anxiety which the
work-driven feel about not working when they
are on vacation and supposed to be having fun.
They have something to do that is like a friendly
imitation of work: they can take pictures.
People robbed of their past seem to make
the most fervent picture takers, at home and
abroad. Everyone who lives in an industrialized
society is obliged gradually to give up the past,
but in certain countries, such as the United
States and Japan, the break with the past has
been particularly traumatic. In the early 1970s,
the fable of the brash American tourist of the
1950s and 1960s, rich with dollars and Babbit
try, was replaced by the mystery of the group
minded Japanese tourist, newly released from
his island prison by the miracle of overvalued
yen, who is generally armed with two cameras,
one on each hip.
Photography has become one of the princi
pal devices for experiencing something, for giv
ing an appearance of participation. One full
page ad shows a small group of people standing
pressed together, peering out of the photograph,
all but one looking stunned, excited, upset. The
one who wears a different expression holds a
camera to his eye; he seems self-possessed, is al
most smiling. While the others are passive,
clearly alarmed spectators, having a camera has
transformed one person into something active, a
voyeur: only he has mastered the situation.
What do these people see? We don't know. And
it doesn't matter. It is an Event: something
worth seeing-and therefore worth photograph
ing. The ad copy, white letters across the dark
lower third of the photograph like news coming
178 Part V • Image Technologies and the Emergence of Mass Society
over a teletype machine, consists of just six
words: " ... Prague ... Woodstock ... Vietnam
... Sapporo ... Londonderr y .. . LEICA."
Crushed hopes, youth antics, colonial wars, and
winter sports are alike-are equ a lized by the
camera. Taking photographs has set up a
chronic voyeuristic relation to the world which
levels the meaning of all events.
A photograph is not just the result of an en
counter between an event and a photographer ;
picture-taking is an event in itself, and one with
ever more peremptor y rights-to interfere with,
to invade, or to ignore whatever is going on. Our
very sense of situation is now articulated by the
camera's interventions. The omnipresence of
cameras persuasive ly suggests that time consists
of interesting events, events worth photograph
ing. This, in turn, makes it easy to feel that any
event, once underway, and whatever its moral
character, should be allowed to complete itself
so that something else can be brought into the
world, the photograph. After the event has ended,
the picture will still exist, conferring on the event
a kind of immortality (and importance) it would
never otherwise have enjoyed. While real people
are out there killing themselves or other real peo
ple, the photographer stays behind his or her
camera, creating a tiny element of another world:
the image-world that bids to outlast us aU.
Photographing is essentially an act of non
intervention. 

Part of the horror of such memorable coups of contemporary photojournalism
as the pictures of a Vietnamese bonze reaching
for the gasoline can, of a Bengali guerrilla in the
act of ba yo neting a trussed-up collaborator,
comes from the awareness of how plausible it
has become, in situations where the photogra
pher has the choice between a photograph a nd a
life, to choose the photograph. 

The person who
intervenes cannot record; the person who is
recording cannot intervene. Dziga Vertov's great
film, Man with a Movie Camera (1'929), gives
the ideal image of the photographer as someone
in perpetual movement, someone movmg
through a panorama of disparate events with
such agility and speed that any intervention is
out of the question. 

Hitchcock's Rear Window (1954) gives the complementary image: the pho
tographer played by James Stewart has an inten
sified relation to one event, through his camera,
precisely because he has a broken leg and is con
fined to a wheelchair; being temporarily immo
bilized prevents him from acting on what he
sees, and makes it even more important to take
pictures. 

Even if incompatible with intervention
in a physical sense, using a camera is still a form
of participation. Although the camera is an ob
servation station, the act of photographing
is more than passive observing. Like sexual
voyeurism, it is a way of at least tacitly, often ex
plicitly, encouraging whatever is going on to
keep on happening. To take a picture is to have
an interest in things as they are, in the status quo
remaining unch anged (at least for as long as it
takes to get a "good" picture), to be in complic
ity with whatever makes a subject interesting,
worth photographing-including, when that is
the interest, another person's pain or misfortune.




now torn down, rural places disfigured and made barren, supply
our pocket relation to the past.
A photograph is both a pseudo-presence and a token of absence.
Like a wood fire in a room, photographs—especially those of
people, of distant landscapes and faraway cities, of the vanished
past—are incitements to reverie. The sense of the unattainable
that can be evoked by photographs feeds directly into the erotic
feelings of those for whom desirability is enhanced by distance.
The lover’s photograph hidden in a married woman’s wallet, the
poster photograph of a rock star tacked up over an adolescent’s
bed, the campaign-button image of a politician’s face pinned on
a voter’s coat, the snapshots of a cabdriver’s children clipped to
the visor—all such talismanic uses of photographs express a feeling
both sentimental and implicitly magical: they are attempts to
contact or lay claim to another reality.
Photographs can abet desire in the most direct, utilitarian way—as
when someone collects photographs of anonymous examples of
the desirable as an aid to masturbation. The matter is more
complex when photographs are used to stimulate the moral
impulse. Desire has no history—at least, it is experienced in each
instance as all foreground, immediacy. It is aroused by archetypes
and is, in that sense, abstract. But moral feelings are embedded
in history, whose personae are concrete, whose situations are
always specific. Thus, almost opposite rules hold true for the use
of the photograph to awaken desire and to awaken conscience.
The images that mobilize conscience are always linked to a given
historical situation. The more general they are, the less likely they
are to be effective.
A photograph that brings news of some unsuspected zone of
misery cannot make a dent in public opinion unless there is an
appropriate context of feeling and attitude. The photographs
Mathew Brady and his colleagues took of the horrors of the
battlefields did not make people any less keen to go on with the
Civil War. The photographs of ill-clad, skeletal prisoners held at
Andersonville inflamed Northern public opinion—against the
South. (The effect of the Andersonville photographs must have
On Photography 12
been partly due to the very novelty, at that time, of seeing
photographs.) The political understanding that many Americans
came to in the 1960s would allow them, looking at the
photographs Dorothea Lange took of Nisei on the West Coast
being transported to internment camps in 1942, to recognize their
subject for what it was—a crime committed by the government
against a large group of American citizens. Few people who saw
those photographs in the 1940s could have had so unequivocal a
reaction; the grounds for such a judgment were covered over by
the pro-war consensus. Photographs cannot create a moral
position, but they can reinforce one—and can help build a nascent
one.
Photographs may be more memorable than moving images,
because they are a neat slice of time, not a flow. Television is a
stream of underselected images, each of which cancels its
predecessor. Each still photograph is a privileged moment, turned
into a slim object that one can keep and look at again.
Photographs like the one that made the front page of most
newspapers in the world in 1972—a naked South Vietnamese
child just sprayed by American napalm, running down a highway
toward the camera, her arms open, screaming with
pain—probably did more to increase the public revulsion against
the war than a hundred hours of televised barbarities.
One would like to imagine that the American public would not
have been so unanimous in its acquiescence to the Korean War
if it had been confronted with photographic evidence of the
devastation of Korea, an ecocide and genocide in some respects
even more thorough than those inflicted on Vietnam a decade
later. But the supposition is trivial. The public did not see such
photographs because there was, ideologically, no space for them.
No one brought back photographs of daily life in Pyongyang, to
show that the enemy had a human face, as Felix Greene and Marc
Riboud brought back photographs of Hanoi. Americans did have
access to photographs of the suffering of the Vietnamese (many
of which came from military sources and were taken with quite
a different use in mind) because journalists felt backed in their
efforts to obtain those photographs, the event having been defined
On Photography 13
by a significant number of people as a savage colonialist war. The
Korean War was understood differently—as part of the just
struggle of the Free World against the Soviet Union and
China—and, given that characterization, photographs of the
cruelty of unlimited American firepower would have been
irrelevant.
Though an event has come to mean, precisely, something worth
photographing, it is still ideology (in the broadest sense) that
determines what constitutes an event. There can be no evidence,
photographic or otherwise, of an event until the event itself has
been named and characterized. And it is never photographic
evidence which can construct—more properly, identify—events;
the contribution of photography always follows the naming of
the event. What determines the possibility of being affected
morally by photographs is the existence of a relevant political
consciousness. Without a politics, photographs of the
slaughter-bench of history will most likely be experienced as,
simply, unreal or as a demoralizing emotional blow.
The quality of feeling, including moral outrage, that people
can muster in response to photographs of the oppressed, the
exploited, the starving, and the massacred also depends on the
degree of their familiarity with these images. Don McCullin’s
photographs of emaciated Biafrans in the early 1970s had less
impact for some people than Werner Bischof’s photographs of
Indian famine victims in the early 1950s because those images
had become banal, and the photographs of Tuareg families dying
of starvation in the sub-Sahara that appeared in magazines
everywhere in 1973 must have seemed to many like an unbearable
replay of a now familiar atrocity exhibition.
Photographs shock insofar as they show something novel.
Unfortunately, the ante keeps getting raised—partly through the
very proliferation of such images of horror. One’s first encounter
with the photographic inventory of ultimate horror is a kind of
revelation, the prototypically modern revelation: a negative
epiphany. For me, it was photographs of Bergen-Belsen and
Dachau which I came across by chance in a bookstore in Santa
Monica in July 1945. Nothing I have seen—in photographs or in
On Photography 14
real life—ever cut me as sharply, deeply, instantaneously. Indeed,
it seems plausible to me to divide my life into two parts, before I
saw those photographs (I was twelve) and after, though it was
several years before I understood fully what they were about.
What good was served by seeing them? They were only
photographs—of an event I had scarcely heard of and could do
nothing to affect, of suffering I could hardly imagine and could
do nothing to relieve. When I looked at those photographs,
something broke. Some limit had been reached, and not only that
of horror; I felt irrevocably grieved, wounded, but a part of my
feelings started to tighten; something went dead; something is
still crying.
To suffer is one thing; another thing is living with the
photographed images of suffering, which does not necessarily
strengthen conscience and the ability to be compassionate. It can
also corrupt them. Once one has seen such images, one has started
down the road of seeing more—and more. Images transfix. Images
anesthetize. An event known through photographs certainly
becomes more real than it would have been if one had never seen
the photographs—think of the Vietnam War. (For a
counter-example, think of the Gulag Archipelago, of which we
have no photographs.) But after repeated exposure to images it
also becomes less real.
The same law holds for evil as for pornography. The shock of
photographed atrocities wears off with repeated viewings, just as
the surprise and bemusement felt the first time one sees a
pornographic movie wear off after one sees a few more. The sense
of taboo which makes us indignant and sorrowful is not much
sturdier than the sense of taboo that regulates the definition of
what is obscene. And both have been sorely tried in recent years.
The vast photographic catalogue of misery and injustice
throughout the world has given everyone a certain familiarity
with atrocity, making the horrible seem more ordinary—making
it appear familiar, remote (“it’s only a photograph”), inevitable.
At the time of the first photographs of the Nazi camps, there was
nothing banal about these images. After thirty years, a saturation
point may have been reached. In these last decades, “concerned”
On Photography 15
photography has done at least as much to deaden conscience as
to arouse it.
The ethical content of photographs is fragile. With the possible
exception of photographs of those horrors, like the Nazi camps,
that have gained the status of ethical reference points, most
photographs do not keep their emotional charge. A photograph
of 1900 that was affecting then because of its subject would, today,
be more likely to move us because it is a photograph taken in
1900. The particular qualities and intentions of photographs tend
to be swallowed up in the generalized pathos of time past.
Aesthetic distance seems built into the very experience of looking
at photographs, if not right away, then certainly with the passage
of time. Time eventually positions most photographs, even the
most amateurish, at the level of art.
The industrialization of photography permitted its rapid
absorption into rational—that is, bureaucratic—ways of running
society. No longer toy images, photographs became part of the
general furniture of the environment—touchstones and
confirmations of that reductive approach to reality which is
considered realistic. Photographs were enrolled in the service of
important institutions of control, notably the family and the
police, as symbolic objects and as pieces of information. Thus, in
the bureaucratic cataloguing of the world, many important
documents are not valid unless they have, affixed to them, a
photograph-token of the citizen’s face.
The “realistic” view of the world compatible with bureaucracy
redefines knowledge—as techniques and information.
Photographs are valued because they give information. They tell
one what there is; they make an inventory. To spies,
meteorologists, coroners, archaeologists, and other information
professionals, their value is inestimable. But in the situations in
which most people use photographs, their value as information
is of the same order as fiction. The information that photographs
can give starts to seem very important at that moment in cultural
history when everyone is thought to have a right to something
called news. Photographs were seen as a way of giving information
On Photography 16
to people who do not take easily to reading. The Daily News still
calls itself “New York’s Picture Newspaper,” its bid for populist
identity. At the opposite end of the scale, Le Monde, a newspaper
designed for skilled, well-informed readers, runs no photographs
at all. The presumption is that, for such readers, a photograph
could only illustrate the analysis contained in an article.
A new sense of the notion of information has been constructed
around the photographic image. The photograph is a thin slice
of space as well as time. In a world ruled by photographic images,
all borders (“framing”) seem arbitrary. Anything can be separated,
can be made discontinuous, from anything else: all that is
necessary is to frame the subject differently. (Conversely, anything
can be made adjacent to anything else.) Photography reinforces
a nominalist view of social reality as consisting of small units of
an apparently infinite number—as the number of photographs
that could be taken of anything is unlimited. Through
photographs, the world becomes a series of unrelated, freestanding
particles; and history, past and present, a set of anecdotes and
faits divers. The camera makes reality atomic, manageable, and
opaque. It is a view of the world which denies interconnectedness,
continuity, but which confers on each moment the character of
a mystery. Any photograph has multiple meanings; indeed, to see
something in the form of a photograph is to encounter a potential
object of fascination. The ultimate wisdom of the photographic
image is to say: “There is the surface. Now think—or rather feel,
intuit—what is beyond it, what the reality must be like if it looks
this way.” Photographs, which cannot themselves explain
anything, are inexhaustible invitations to deduction, speculation,
and fantasy.
Photography implies that we know about the world if we accept
it as the camera records it. But this is the opposite of
understanding, which starts from not accepting the world as it
looks. All possibility of understanding is rooted in the ability to
say no. Strictly speaking, one never understands anything from
a photograph. Of course, photographs fill in blanks in our mental
pictures of the present and the past: for example, Jacob Riis’s
images of New York squalor in the 1880s are sharply instructive
On Photography 17
to those unaware that urban poverty in late-nineteenth-century
America was really that Dickensian. Nevertheless, the camera’s
rendering of reality must always hide more than it discloses. As
Brecht points out, a photograph of the Krupp works reveals
virtually nothing about that organization. In contrast to the
amorous relation, which is based on how something looks,
understanding is based on how it functions. And functioning
takes place in time, and must be explained in time. Only that
which narrates can make us understand.
The limit of photographic knowledge of the world is that, while
it can goad conscience, it can, finally, never be ethical or political
knowledge. The knowledge gained through still photographs will
always be some kind of sentimentalism, whether cynical or
humanist. It will be a knowledge at bargain prices—a semblance
of knowledge, a semblance of wisdom; as the act of taking pictures
is a semblance of appropriation, a semblance of rape. The very
muteness of what is, hypothetically, comprehensible in
photographs is what constitutes their attraction and
provocativeness. The omnipresence of photographs has an
incalculable effect on our ethical sensibility. By furnishing this
already crowded world with a duplicate one of images,
photography makes us feel that the world is more available than
it really is.
Needing to have reality confirmed and experience enhanced
by photographs is an aesthetic consumerism to which everyone
is now addicted. Industrial societies turn their citizens into
image-junkies; it is the most irresistible form of mental pollution.
Poignant longings for beauty, for an end to probing below the
surface, for a redemption and celebration of the body of the
world—all these elements of erotic feeling are affirmed in the
pleasure we take in photographs. But other, less liberating feelings
are expressed as well. It would not be wrong to speak of people
having a compulsion to photograph: to turn experience itself into
a way of seeing. Ultimately, having an experience becomes
identical with taking a photograph of it, and participating in a
public event comes more and more to be equivalent to looking
at it in photographed form. That most logical of nineteenth-century aesthetes, Mallarmé, said that everything in
the world exists in order to end in a book. Today everything exists
to end in a photograph.

