---
heading: "Enlightened"
title: "Spinoza"
description: "Spinoza was a philosopher who wrote about God as a pantheist substance. He is essential for Bio Superphysics"
a: "Spinoza"
c: "Indigo"
# date: 2022-04-15
weight: 198
draft: true
---




image world


Reality has always been interpreted through images.

Philosophers since Plato have tried to impose an abstraction of reality, away from images. 

 <!-- loosen our dependence on images by evoking the standard of an image-free way of apprehending the real.  -->

In the mid-19th century, this standard finally seemed attainable because the old religious and political illusions retreat from the advance of humanistic and scientific thinking.

did not—as anticipated—create mass
defections to the real. 

On the contrary, the new age of unbelief
strengthened the allegiance to images. 

The credence that could
no longer be given to realities understood in the form of images
was now being given to realities understood to be images, illusions.


In the preface to the second edition (1843) of The Essence of Christianity, Feuerbach observes about “our era” that it “prefers the image to the thing, the copy to the original, the representation to the reality, appearance to being”—while being aware of doing just that. 

This is seen in the 20th century. 

A society becomes “modern” when:
- one of its chief activities is producing and consuming images
- images that have extraordinary powers to determine our demands upon reality and are themselves coveted substitutes for firsthand experience become indispensable to the health of the economy, the stability of the polity, and the pursuit of private happiness.

Feuerbach was writing a few years after the invention of the camera.

<!-- —seem, more specifically, a presentiment of the
impact of photography. For the images that have virtually

unlimited authority in a modern society are mainly photographic
images; and the scope of that authority stems from the properties
peculiar to images taken by cameras. -->

Such images are able to usurp reality because a photograph is an interpretation of the real.

It is also a trace, something directly stenciled off the real, like a footprint or a death mask. 

But a painting is an interpretation.

<!-- a photograph is never less than the registering of an emanation
(light waves reflected by objects)—a material vestige of its subject
in a way that no painting can be. Between two fantasy alternatives,
that Holbein the Younger had lived long enough to have painted
Shakespeare or that a prototype of the camera had been invented
early enough to have photographed him, most Bardolators would
choose the photograph. This is not just because it would
presumably show what Shakespeare really looked like, for even
if the hypothetical photograph were faded, barely legible, a
brownish shadow, we would probably still prefer it to another
glorious Holbein. Having a photograph of Shakespeare would be
like having a nail from the True Cross. -->

Most contemporary expressions of concern that an image-world
is replacing the real one continue to echo, as Feuerbach did, the
Platonic depreciation of the image: true insofar as it resembles
something real, sham because it is no more than a resemblance.

But this venerable naïve realism is somewhat beside the point in the era of photographic images, for its blunt contrast between the
image (“copy”) and the thing depicted (the “original”)—which
Plato repeatedly illustrates with the example of a painting—does
not fit a photograph in so simple a way. Neither does the contrast
help in understanding image-making at its origins, when it was
a practical, magical activity, a means of appropriating or gaining
power over something. The further back we go in history, as E.
H. Gombrich has observed, the less sharp is the distinction
between images and real things; in primitive societies, the thing
and its image were simply two different, that is, physically distinct,
manifestations of the same energy or spirit. Hence, the supposed efficacy of images in propitiating and gaining control over
powerful presences. Those powers, those presences were present
in them.

For defenders of the real from Plato to Feuerbach to equate
image with mere appearance—that is, to presume that the image
is absolutely distinct from the object depicted—is part of that
process of desacralization which separates us irrevocably from
the world of sacred times and places in which an image was taken
to participate in the reality of the object depicted. What defines
the originality of photography is that, at the very moment in the
long, increasingly secular history of painting when secularism is
entirely triumphant, it revives—in wholly secular
terms—something like the primitive status of images. 

Our irrepressible feeling that the photographic process is something
magical has a genuine basis. No one takes an easel painting to be
in any sense co-substantial with its subject; it only represents or
refers. But a photograph is not only like its subject, a homage to
the subject. It is part of, an extension of that subject; and a potent
means of acquiring it, of gaining control over it.

Photography is acquisition in several forms. 

In its simplest
form, we have in a photograph surrogate possession of a cherished
person or thing, a possession which gives photographs some of
the character of unique objects. Through photographs, we also
have a consumer’s relation to events, both to events which are
part of our experience and to those which are not—a distinction
between types of experience that such habit-forming
consumership blurs. 

A third form of acquisition is that, through
image-making and image-duplicating machines, we can acquire
something as information (rather than experience). Indeed, the
importance of photographic images as the medium through which
more and more events enter our experience is, finally, only a
byproduct of their effectiveness in furnishing knowledge
dissociated from and independent of experience.

This is the most inclusive form of photographic acquisition.

Through being photographed, something becomes part of a
system of information, fitted into schemes of classification and
storage which range from the crudely chronological order of snapshot sequences pasted in family albums to the dogged
accumulations and meticulous filing needed for photography’s
uses in weather forecasting, astronomy, microbiology, geology,
police work, medical training and diagnosis, military
reconnaissance, and art history. 

Photographs do more than
redefine the stuff of ordinary experience (people, things, events,
whatever we see—albeit differently, often inattentively—with
natural vision) and add vast amounts of material that we never
see at all. Reality as such is redefined—as an item for exhibition,
as a record for scrutiny, as a target for surveillance. The
photographic exploration and duplication of the world fragments
continuities and feeds the pieces into an interminable dossier,
thereby providing possibilities of control that could not even be
dreamed of under the earlier system of recording information:
writing.

That photographic recording is always, potentially, a means of
control was already recognized when such powers were in their
infancy. 

In 1850, Delacroix noted in his Journal the success of
some “experiments in photography” being made at Cambridge,
where astronomers were photographing the sun and the moon
and had managed to obtain a pinhead-size impression of the star
Vega. He added the following “curious” observation:
Since the light of the star which was daguerreotyped took
twenty years to traverse the space separating it from the
earth, the ray which was fixed on the plate had consequently
left the celestial sphere a long time before Daguerre had
discovered the process by means of which we have just gained
control of this light.

Leaving behind such puny notions of control as Delacroix’s,
photography’s progress has made ever more literal the senses in
which a photograph gives control over the thing photographed.
The technology that has already minimized the extent to which
the distance separating photographer from subject affects the
precision and magnitude of the image; provided ways to photograph things which are unimaginably small as well as those,
like stars, which are unimaginably far; rendered picture-taking independent of light itself (infrared photography) and freed the
picture-object from its confinement to two dimensions
(holography); shrunk the interval between sighting the picture
and holding it in one’s hands (from the first Kodak, when it took
weeks for a developed roll of film to be returned to the amateur
photographer, to the Polaroid, which ejects the image in a few
seconds); not only got images to move (cinema) but achieved
their simultaneous recording and transmission (video)—this
technology has made photography an incomparable tool for
deciphering behavior, predicting it, and interfering with it.
Photography has powers that no other image-system has ever
enjoyed because, unlike the earlier ones, it is not dependent on
an image maker. However carefully the photographer intervenes
in setting up and guiding the image-making process, the process
itself remains an optical-chemical (or electronic) one, the
workings of which are automatic, the machinery for which will
inevitably be modified to provide still more detailed and,
therefore, more useful maps of the real. 

The mechanical genesis
of these images, and the literalness of the powers they confer,
amounts to a new relationship between image and reality. And if
photography could also be said to restore the most primitive
relationship—the partial identity of image and object—the
potency of the image is now experienced in a very different way.
The primitive notion of the efficacy of images presumes that
images possess the qualities of real things, but our inclination is
to attribute to real things the qualities of an image.
As everyone knows, primitive people fear that the camera will
rob them of some part of their being. In the memoir he published
in 1900, at the end of a very long life, Nadar reports that Balzac
had a similar “vague dread” of being photographed. 

His
explanation, according to Nadar, was that
every body in its natural state was made up of a series of
ghostly images superimposed in layers to infinity, wrapped
in infinitesimal films…. Man never having been able to
create, that is to make something material from an
apparition, from something impalpable, or to make from nothing, an object—each Daguerreian operation was
therefore going to lay hold of, detach, and use up one of the
layers of the body on which it focused.

It seems fitting for Balzac to have had this particular brand of
trepidation—“Was Balzac’s fear of the Daguerreotype real or
feigned?” Nadar asks. “It was real…”—since the procedure of
photography is a materializing, so to speak, of what is most
original in his procedure as a novelist. 

The Balzacian operation was to magnify tiny details, as in a photographic enlargement, to juxtapose incongruous traits or items, as in a photographic layout:
made expressive in this way, any one thing can be connected with
everything else. For Balzac, the spirit of an entire milieu could be
disclosed by a single material detail, however paltry or
arbitrary-seeming. The whole of a life may be summed up in a
momentary appearance.* And a change in appearances is a change
in the person, for he refused to posit any “real” person ensconced
behind these appearances. Balzac’s fanciful theory, expressed to
Nadar, that a body is composed of an infinite series of “ghostly
images,” eerily parallels the supposedly realistic theory expressed
in his novels, that a person is an aggregate of appearances,
appearances which can be made to yield, by proper focusing,
infinite layers of significance. To view reality as an endless set of
situations which mirror each other, to extract analogies from the
most dissimilar things, is to anticipate the characteristic form of


perception stimulated by photographic images. Reality itself has
started to be understood as a kind of writing, which has to be
decoded—even as photographed images were themselves first
compared to writing. 

(Niepce’s name for the process whereby the
image appears on the plate was heliography, sun-writing; Fox
Talbot called the camera “the pencil of nature.”)

The problem with Feuerbach’s contrast of “original” with
“copy” is its static definitions of reality and image. It assumes that
what is real persists, unchanged and intact, while only images
have changed: shored up by the most tenuous claims to credibility,
they have somehow become more seductive. But the notions of
image and reality are complementary. When the notion of reality
changes, so does that of the image, and vice versa. “Our era” does
not prefer images to real things out of perversity but partly in
response to the ways in which the notion of what is real has been
progressively complicated and weakened, one of the early ways
being the criticism of reality as façade which arose among the
enlightened middle classes in the last century. (This was of course
the very opposite of the effect intended.) To reduce large parts of
what has hitherto been regarded as real to mere fantasy, as
Feuerbach did when he called religion “the dream of the human
mind” and dismissed theological ideas as psychological
projections; or to inflate the random and trivial details of everyday
life into ciphers of hidden historical and psychological forces, as
Balzac did in his encyclopedia of social reality in novel
form—these are themselves ways of experiencing reality as a set
of appearances, an image.


Few people in this society share the primitive dread of cameras
that comes from thinking of the photograph as a material part of
themselves. But some trace of the magic remains: for example, in
our reluctance to tear up or throw away the photograph of a loved
one, especially of someone dead or far away. To do so is a ruthless
gesture of rejection. In Jude the Obscure it is Jude’s discovery that
Arabella has sold the maple frame with the photograph of himself
in it which he gave her on their wedding day that signifies to Jude
“the utter death of every sentiment in his wife” and is “the
conclusive little stroke to demolish all sentiment in him.” But the true modern primitivism is not to regard the image as a real thing;
photographic images are hardly that real. Instead, reality has come
to seem more and more like what we are shown by cameras. It is
common now for people to insist about their experience of a
violent event in which they were caught up—a plane crash, a
shoot-out, a terrorist bombing—that “it seemed like a movie.”
This is said, other descriptions seeming insufficient, in order to
explain how real it was. While many people in non-industrialized
countries still feel apprehensive when being photographed,
divining it to be some kind of trespass, an act of disrespect, a
sublimated looting of the personality or the culture, people in
industrialized countries seek to have their photographs taken—feel
that they are images, and are made real by photographs.
A steadily more complex sense of the real creates its own
compensatory fervors and simplifications, the most addictive of
which is picture-taking. It is as if photographers, responding to
an increasingly depleted sense of reality, were looking for a
transfusion—traveling to new experiences, refreshing the old
ones. Their ubiquitous activities amount to the most radical, and
the safest, version of mobility. The urge to have new experiences
is translated into the urge to take photographs: experience seeking
a crisis-proof form.



<!-- As the taking of photographs seems almost obligatory to those
who travel about, the passionate collecting of them has special
appeal for those confined—either by choice, incapacity, or
coercion—to indoor space.  -->


## Photograph collections

Photograph collections can be used
to make a substitute world, keyed to exalting or consoling or
tantalizing images. 

A photograph can be the starting point of a
romance (Hardy’s Jude had already fallen in love with Sue
Bridehead’s photograph before he met her), but it is more
common for the erotic relation to be not only created by but
understood as limited to the photographs. In Cocteau’s Les Enfants
Terribles, the narcissistic brother and sister share their bedroom,
their “secret room,” with images of boxers, movie stars, and
murderers. Isolating themselves in their lair to live out their
private legend, the two adolescents put up these photographs, a private pantheon. On one wall of cell No. 426 in Fresnes Prison
in the early 1940s Jean Genet pasted the photographs of twenty
criminals he had clipped from newspapers, twenty faces in which
he discerned “the sacred sign of the monster,” and in their honor
wrote Our Lady of the Flowers; they served as his muses, his
models, his erotic talismans. “They watch over my little routines,”
writes Genet—conflating reverie, masturbation, and writing—and
“are all the family I have and my only friends.” For stay-at-homes,
prisoners, and the self-imprisoned, to live among the photographs
of glamorous strangers is a sentimental response to isolation and
an insolent challenge to it.

J. G. Ballard’s novel Crash (1973) describes a more specialized
collecting of photographs in the service of sexual obsession:
photographs of car accidents which the narrator’s friend Vaughan
collects while preparing to stage his own death in a car crash. The
acting out of his erotic vision of car death is anticipated and the
fantasy itself further eroticized by the repeated perusal of these
photographs. At one end of the spectrum, photographs are
objective data; at the other end, they are items of psychological
science fiction. And as in even the most dreadful, or
neutral-seeming, reality a sexual imperative can be found, so even
the most banal photograph-document can mutate into an emblem
of desire. The mug shot is a clue to a detective, an erotic fetish to
a fellow thief. To Hofrat Behrens, in The Magic Mountain, the
pulmonary X-rays of his patients are diagnostic tools. To Hans
Castorp, serving an indefinite sentence in Behrens’s TB
sanatorium, and made lovesick by the enigmatic, unattainable
Clavdia Chauchat, “Clavdia’s X-ray portrait, showing not her
face, but the delicate bony structure of the upper half of her body,
and the organs of the thoracic cavity, surrounded by the pale,
ghostlike envelope of flesh,” is the most precious of trophies. The
“transparent portrait” is a far more intimate vestige of his beloved
than the Hofrat’s painting of Clavdia, that “exterior portrait,”
which Hans had once gazed at with such longing.


One can’t possess reality, one can possess (and be possessed by)
images—as, according to Proust, most ambitious of voluntary
prisoners, one can’t possess the present but one can possess the
past. Nothing could be more unlike the self-sacrificial travail of
an artist like Proust than the effortlessness of picture-taking, which
must be the sole activity resulting in accredited works of art in
which a single movement, a touch of the finger, produces a
complete work. While the Proustian labors presuppose that reality
is distant, photography implies instant access to the real. But the
results of this practice of instant access are another way of creating
distance. 

To possess the world in the form of images is, precisely,
to reexperience the unreality and remoteness of the real.
The strategy of Proust’s realism presumes distance from what
is normally experienced as real, the present, in order to reanimate
what is usually available only in a remote and shadowy form, the
past—which is where the present becomes in his sense real, that
is, something that can be possessed. In this effort photographs
were of no help. Whenever Proust mentions photographs, he
does so disparagingly: as a synonym for a shallow, too exclusively
visual, merely voluntary relation to the past, whose yield is
insignificant compared with the deep discoveries to be made by
responding to cues given by all the senses—the technique he called
“involuntary memory.” One can’t imagine the Overture to
Swann’s Way ending with the narrator’s coming across a snapshot
of the parish church at Combray and the savoring of that visual
crumb, instead of the taste of the humble madeleine dipped in
tea, making an entire part of his past spring into view. But this is
not because a photograph cannot evoke memories (it can,
depending on the quality of the viewer rather than of the
photograph) but because of what Proust makes clear about his
own demands upon imaginative recall, that it be not just extensive
and accurate but give the texture and essence of things. And by
considering photographs only so far as he could use them, as an
instrument of memory, Proust somewhat misconstrues what
photographs are: not so much an instrument of memory as an
invention of it or a replacement.

It is not reality that photographs make immediately accessible


but images. For example, now all adults can know exactly how
they and their parents and grandparents looked as children—a
knowledge not available to anyone before the invention of
cameras, not even to that tiny minority among whom it was
customary to commission paintings of their children. Most of
these portraits were less informative than any snapshot. And even
the very wealthy usually owned just one portrait of themselves or
any of their forebears as children, that is, an image of one moment
of childhood, whereas it is common to have many photographs
of oneself, the camera offering the possibility of possessing a
complete record, at all ages. The point of the standard portraits
in the bourgeois household of the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries was to confirm an ideal of the sitter (proclaiming social
standing, embellishing personal appearance); given this purpose,
it is clear why their owners did not feel the need to have more
than one. What the photograph-record confirms is, more
modestly, simply that the subject exists; therefore, one can never
have too many.
The fear that a subject’s uniqueness was leveled by being
photographed was never so frequently expressed as in the 1850s,
the years when portrait photography gave the first example of
how cameras could create instant fashions and durable industries.
In Melville’s Pierre, published at the start of the decade, the hero,
another fevered champion of voluntary isolation,
considered with what infinite readiness now, the most
faithful portrait of any one could be taken by the
Daguerreotype, whereas in former times a faithful portrait
was only within the power of the moneyed, or mental
aristocrats of the earth. How natural then the inference, that
instead of, as in old times, immortalizing a genius, a portrait
now only dayalized a dunce. Besides, when every body has
his portrait published, true distinction lies in not having
yours published at all.
But if photographs demean, paintings distort in the opposite way:
they make grandiose. Melville’s intuition is that all forms of
portraiture in the business civilization are compromised; at least,

so it appears to Pierre, a paragon of alienated sensibility. Just as
a photograph is too little in a mass society, a painting is too much.
The nature of a painting, Pierre observes, makes it
better entitled to reverence than the man; inasmuch as
nothing belittling can be imagined concerning the portrait,
whereas many unavoidably belittling things can be fancied
as touching the man.
Even if such ironies can be considered to have been dissolved by
the completeness of photography’s triumph, the main difference
between a painting and a photograph in the matter of portraiture
still holds. Paintings invariably sum up; photographs usually do
not. Photographic images are pieces of evidence in an ongoing
biography or history. And one photograph, unlike one painting,
implies that there will be others.
“Ever—the Human Document to keep the present and the
future in touch with the past,” said Lewis Hine. But what
photography supplies is not only a record of the past but a new
way of dealing with the present, as the effects of the countless
billions of contemporary photograph-documents attest. While
old photographs fill out our mental image of the past, the
photographs being taken now transform what is present into a
mental image, like the past. Cameras establish an inferential
relation to the present (reality is known by its traces), provide an
instantly retroactive view of experience. Photographs give mock
forms of possession: of the past, the present, even the future. In
Nabokov’s Invitation to a Beheading (1938), the prisoner
Cincinnatus is shown the “photohoroscope” of a child cast by the
sinister M’sieur Pierre: an album of photographs of little Emmie
as an infant, then a small child, then pre-pubescent, as she is now,
then—by retouching and using photographs of her mother—of
Emmie the adolescent, the bride, the thirty-year-old, concluding
with a photograph at age forty, Emmie on her deathbed. A
“parody of the work of time” is what Nabokov calls this exemplary
artifact; it is also a parody of the work of photography.
Photography, which has so many narcissistic uses, is also a



powerful instrument for depersonalizing our relation to the world;
and the two uses are complementary. Like a pair of binoculars
with no right or wrong end, the camera makes exotic things near,
intimate; and familiar things small, abstract, strange, much farther
away. It offers, in one easy, habit-forming activity, both
participation and alienation in our own lives and those of
others—allowing us to participate, while confirming alienation.
War and photography now seem inseparable, and plane crashes
and other horrific accidents always attract people with cameras.
A society which makes it normative to aspire never to experience
privation, failure, misery, pain, dread disease, and in which death
itself is regarded not as natural and inevitable but as a cruel,
unmerited disaster, creates a tremendous curiosity about these
events—a curiosity that is partly satisfied through picture-taking.
The feeling of being exempt from calamity stimulates interest in
looking at painful pictures, and looking at them suggests and
strengthens the feeling that one is exempt. Partly it is because one
is “here,” not “there,” and partly it is the character of inevitability
that all events acquire when they are transmuted into images. In
the real world, something is happening and no one knows what
is going to happen. In the image-world, it has happened, and it
will forever happen in that way.
Knowing a great deal about what is in the world (art,
catastrophe, the beauties of nature) through photographic images,
people are frequently disappointed, surprised, unmoved when
they see the real thing. For photographic images tend to subtract
feeling from something we experience at first hand and the feelings
they do arouse are, largely, not those we have in real life. Often
something disturbs us more in photographed form than it does
when we actually experience it. In a hospital in Shanghai in 1973,
watching a factory worker with advanced ulcers have nine-tenths
of his stomach removed under acupuncture anesthesia, I managed
to follow the three-hour procedure (the first operation I’d ever
observed) without queasiness, never once feeling the need to look
away. In a movie theater in Paris a year later, the less gory
operation in Antonioni’s China documentary Chung Kuo made
me flinch at the first cut of the scalpel and avert my eyes several



times during the sequence. One is vulnerable to disturbing events
in the form of photographic images in a way that one is not to
the real thing. That vulnerability is part of the distinctive passivity
of someone who is a spectator twice over, spectator of events
already shaped, first by the participants and second by the image
maker. For the real operation I had to get scrubbed, don a surgical
gown, then stand alongside the busy surgeons and nurses with
my roles to play: inhibited adult, well-mannered guest, respectful
witness. The movie operation precludes not only this modest
participation but whatever is active in spectatorship. In the
operating room, I am the one who changes focus, who makes the
close-ups and the medium shots. In the theater, Antonioni has
already chosen what parts of the operation I can watch; the camera
looks for me—and obliges me to look, leaving as my only option
not to look. Further, the movie condenses something that takes
hours to a few minutes, leaving only interesting parts presented
in an interesting way, that is, with the intent to stir or shock. The
dramatic is dramatized, by the didactics of layout and montage.
We turn the page in a photo-magazine, a new sequence starts in
a movie, making a contrast that is sharper than the contrast
between successive events in real time.
Nothing could be more instructive about the meaning of
photography for us—as, among other things, a method of hyping
up the real—than the attacks on Antonioni’s film in the Chinese
press in early 1974. They make a negative catalogue of all the
devices of modern photography, still and film.* While for us

photography is intimately connected with discontinuous ways of
seeing (the point is precisely to see the whole by means of a
part—an arresting detail, a striking way of cropping), in China
it is connected only with continuity. Not only are there proper
subjects for the camera, those which are positive, inspirational
(exemplary activities, smiling people, bright weather), and orderly,
but there are proper ways of photographing, which derive from
notions about the moral order of space that preclude the very
idea of photographic seeing. Thus Antonioni was reproached for
photographing things that were old, or old-fashioned—“he sought
out and took dilapidated walls and blackboard newspapers
discarded long ago”; paying “no attention to big and small tractors
working in the fields, [he] chose only a donkey pulling a stone
roller”—and for showing undecorous moments—“he disgustingly
filmed people blowing their noses and going to the latrine”—and
undisciplined movement—“instead of taking shots of pupils in
the classroom in our factory-run primary school, he filmed the
children running out of the classroom after a class.” And he was
accused of denigrating the right subjects by his way of
photographing them: by using “dim and dreary colors” and hiding
people in “dark shadows”; by treating the same subject with a
variety of shots—“there are sometimes long-shots, sometimes
close-ups, sometimes from the front, and sometimes from
behind”—that is, for not showing things from the point of view
of a single, ideally placed observer; by using high and low
angles—“The camera was intentionally turned on this magnificent
modern bridge from very bad angles in order to make it appear
crooked and tottering”; and by not taking enough full shots—“He
racked his brain to get such close-ups in an attempt to distort the
people’s image and uglify their spiritual outlook.”
Besides the mass-produced photographic iconography of
revered leaders, revolutionary kitsch, and cultural treasures, one
often sees photographs of a private sort in China. Many people
possess pictures of their loved ones, tacked to the wall or stuck



under the glass on top of the dresser or office desk. A large number
of these are the sort of snapshots taken here at family gatherings
and on trips; but none is a candid photograph, not even of the
kind that the most unsophisticated camera user in this society
finds normal—a baby crawling on the floor, someone in
mid-gesture. Sports photographs show the team as a group, or
only the most stylized balletic moments of play: generally, what
people do with the camera is assemble for it, then line up in a row
or two. There is no interest in catching a subject in movement.
This is, one supposes, partly because of certain old conventions
of decorum in conduct and imagery. And it is the characteristic
visual taste of those at the first stage of camera culture, when the
image is defined as something that can be stolen from its owner;
thus, Antonioni was reproached for “forcibly taking shots against
people’s wishes,” like “a thief.” Possession of a camera does not
license intrusion, as it does in this society whether people like it
or not. (The good manners of a camera culture dictate that one
is supposed to pretend not to notice when one is being
photographed by a stranger in a public place as long as the
photographer stays at a discreet distance—that is, one is supposed
neither to forbid the picture-taking nor to start posing.) Unlike
here, where we pose where we can and yield when we must, in
China taking pictures is always a ritual; it always involves posing
and, necessarily, consent. Someone who “deliberately stalked
people who were unaware of his intention to film them” was
depriving people and things of their right to pose, in order to look
their best.
Antonioni devoted nearly all of the sequence in Chung Kuo
about Peking’s Tien An Men Square, the country’s foremost goal
of political pilgrimage, to the pilgrims waiting to be photographed.
The interest to Antonioni of showing Chinese performing that
elementary rite, having a trip documented by the camera, is
evident: the photograph and being photographed are favorite
contemporary subjects for the camera. To his critics, the desire
of visitors to Tien An Men Square for a photograph souvenir



The Chinese resist the photographic dismemberment of reality.
Close-ups are not used. Even the postcards of antiquities and
works of art sold in museums do not show part of something; the
object is always photographed straight on, centered, evenly lit,
and in its entirety.
We find the Chinese naïve for not perceiving the beauty of the
cracked peeling door, the picturesqueness of disorder, the force
of the odd angle and the significant detail, the poetry of the turned
back. We have a modern notion of embellishment—beauty is not
inherent in anything; it is to be found, by another way of
seeing—as well as a wider notion of meaning, which
photography’s many uses illustrate and powerfully reinforce. The
more numerous the variations of something, the richer its
possibilities of meaning: thus, more is said with photographs in
the West than in China today. Apart from whatever is true about
Chung Kuo as an item of ideological merchandise (and the Chinese
are not wrong in finding the film condescending), Antonioni’s
images simply mean more than any images the Chinese release of
themselves. The Chinese don’t want photographs to mean very
much or to be very interesting. They do not want to see the world
from an unusual angle, to discover new subjects. Photographs
are supposed to display what has already been described.
Photography for us is a double-edged instrument for producing
clichés (the French word that means both trite expression and
photographic negative) and for serving up “fresh” views. For the
Chinese authorities, there are only clichés—which they consider
not to be clichés but “correct” views.
In China today, only two realities are acknowledged. We see
reality as hopelessly and interestingly plural. In China, what is
defined as an issue for debate is one about which there are “two




lines,” a right one and a wrong one. Our society proposes a
spectrum of discontinuous choices and perceptions. Theirs is
constructed around a single, ideal observer; and photographs
contribute their bit to the Great Monologue. For us, there are
dispersed, interchangeable “points of view”; photography is a
polylogue. The current Chinese ideology defines reality as a
historical process structured by recurrent dualisms with clearly
outlined, morally colored meanings; the past, for the most part,
is simply judged as bad. For us, there are historical processes with
awesomely complex and sometimes contradictory meanings; and
arts which draw much of their value from our consciousness of
time as history, like photography. (This is why the passing of time
adds to the aesthetic value of photographs, and the scars of time
make objects more rather than less enticing to photographers.)
With the idea of history, we certify our interest in knowing the
greatest number of things. The only use the Chinese are allowed
to make of their history is didactic: their interest in history is
narrow, moralistic, deforming, uncurious. Hence, photography
in our sense has no place in their society.
The limits placed on photography in China only reflect the
character of their society, a society unified by an ideology of stark,
unremitting conflict. Our unlimited use of photographic images
not only reflects but gives shape to this society, one unified by
the denial of conflict. Our very notion of the world—the capitalist
twentieth century’s “one world”—is like a photographic overview.
The world is “one” not because it is united but because a tour of
its diverse contents does not reveal conflict but only an even more
astounding diversity. This spurious unity of the world is effected
by translating its contents into images. Images are always
compatible, or can be made compatible, even when the realities
they depict are not.
Photography does not simply reproduce the real, it recycles
it—a key procedure of a modern society. In the form of
photographic images, things and events are put to new uses,
assigned new meanings, which go beyond the distinctions between
the beautiful and the ugly, the true and the false, the useful and
the useless, good taste and bad. Photography is one of the chief



means for producing that quality ascribed to things and situations
which erases these distinctions: “the interesting.” What makes
something interesting is that it can be seen to be like, or analogous
to, something else. There is an art and there are fashions of seeing
things in order to make them interesting; and to supply this art,
these fashions, there is a steady recycling of the artifacts and tastes
of the past. Clichés, recycled, become meta-clichés. The
photographic recycling makes clichés out of unique objects,
distinctive and vivid artifacts out of clichés. Images of real things
are interlayered with images of images. The Chinese circumscribe
the uses of photography so that there are no layers or strata of
images, and all images reinforce and reiterate each other.* We
make of photography a means by which, precisely, anything can
be said, any purpose served. What in reality is discrete, images
join. In the form of a photograph the explosion of an A-bomb
can be used to advertise a safe.
To us, the difference between the photographer as an individual
eye and the photographer as an objective recorder seems
fundamental, the difference often regarded, mistakenly, as
separating photography as art from photography as document.
But both are logical extensions of what photography means:



Photographs are a way of imprisoning reality, understood as
recalcitrant, inaccessible; of making it stand still. Or they enlarge
a reality that is felt to be shrunk, hollowed out, perishable, remote.


As the taking of photographs seems almost obligatory to those
who travel about, the passionate collecting of them has special
appeal for those confined—either by choice, incapacity, or
coercion—to indoor space. 

Photograph collections can be used
to make a substitute world, keyed to exalting or consoling or
tantalizing images. A photograph can be the starting point of a
romance (Hardy’s Jude had already fallen in love with Sue
Bridehead’s photograph before he met her), but it is more
common for the erotic relation to be not only created by but
understood as limited to the photographs. 

In Cocteau’s Les Enfants
Terribles, the narcissistic brother and sister share their bedroom,
their “secret room,” with images of boxers, movie stars, and
murderers. Isolating themselves in their lair to live out their
private legend, the two adolescents put up these photographs, a under the glass on top of the dresser or office desk. A large number
of these are the sort of snapshots taken here at family gatherings
and on trips; but none is a candid photograph, not even of the
kind that the most unsophisticated camera user in this society
finds normal—a baby crawling on the floor, someone in
mid-gesture. 

Sports photographs show the team as a group, or
only the most stylized balletic moments of play: generally, what
people do with the camera is assemble for it, then line up in a row
or two. There is no interest in catching a subject in movement.

This is, one supposes, partly because of certain old conventions
of decorum in conduct and imagery. And it is the characteristic
visual taste of those at the first stage of camera culture, when the
image is defined as something that can be stolen from its owner;
thus, Antonioni was reproached for “forcibly taking shots against
people’s wishes,” like “a thief.” Possession of a camera does not
license intrusion, as it does in this society whether people like it
or not. 

(The good manners of a camera culture dictate that one
is supposed to pretend not to notice when one is being
photographed by a stranger in a public place as long as the
photographer stays at a discreet distance—that is, one is supposed
neither to forbid the picture-taking nor to start posing.) 

Unlike
here, where we pose where we can and yield when we must, in
China taking pictures is always a ritual; it always involves posing
and, necessarily, consent. 

Someone who “deliberately stalked
people who were unaware of his intention to film them” was
depriving people and things of their right to pose, in order to look their best.

Antonioni devoted nearly all of the sequence in Chung Kuo
about Peking’s Tien An Men Square, the country’s foremost goal
of political pilgrimage, to the pilgrims waiting to be photographed.


The interest to Antonioni of showing Chinese performing that
elementary rite, having a trip documented by the camera, is
evident: the photograph and being photographed are favorite
contemporary subjects for the camera. To his critics, the desire
of visitors to Tien An Men Square for a photograph souvenir is a reflection of their deep revolutionary feelings. 

But with
bad intentions, Antonioni, instead of showing this reality,
took shots only of people’s clothing, movement, and
expressions: here, someone’s ruffled hair; there, people
peering, their eyes dazzled by the sun; one moment, their
sleeves; another, their trousers….

The Chinese resist the photographic dismemberment of reality.

Close-ups are not used. Even the postcards of antiquities and
works of art sold in museums do not show part of something; the
object is always photographed straight on, centered, evenly lit,
and in its entirety.

We find the Chinese naïve for not perceiving the beauty of the
cracked peeling door, the picturesqueness of disorder, the force
of the odd angle and the significant detail, the poetry of the turned
back. 

We have a modern notion of embellishment—beauty is not
inherent in anything; it is to be found, by another way of
seeing—as well as a wider notion of meaning, which
photography’s many uses illustrate and powerfully reinforce. 

The
more numerous the variations of something, the richer its
possibilities of meaning: thus, more is said with photographs in
the West than in China today. 

Apart from whatever is true about
Chung Kuo as an item of ideological merchandise (and the Chinese
are not wrong in finding the film condescending), Antonioni’s
images simply mean more than any images the Chinese release of
themselves. 

The Chinese don’t want photographs to mean very
much or to be very interesting. They do not want to see the world
from an unusual angle, to discover new subjects. 

Photographs
are supposed to display what has already been described.

Photography for us is a double-edged instrument for producing
clichés (the French word that means both trite expression and
photographic negative) and for serving up “fresh” views. For the
Chinese authorities, there are only clichés—which they consider
not to be clichés but “correct” views.

In China today, only two realities are acknowledged. We see
reality as hopelessly and interestingly plural. In China, what is
defined as an issue for debate is one about which there are “two lines,” a right one and a wrong one. Our society proposes a
spectrum of discontinuous choices and perceptions. 

Theirs is
constructed around a single, ideal observer; and photographs
contribute their bit to the Great Monologue. For us, there are
dispersed, interchangeable “points of view”; photography is a
polylogue. 

The current Chinese ideology defines reality as a
historical process structured by recurrent dualisms with clearly
outlined, morally colored meanings; the past, for the most part,
is simply judged as bad. 

For us, there are historical processes with
awesomely complex and sometimes contradictory meanings; and
arts which draw much of their value from our consciousness of
time as history, like photography. 

(This is why the passing of time
adds to the aesthetic value of photographs, and the scars of time
make objects more rather than less enticing to photographers.)

With the idea of history, we certify our interest in knowing the
greatest number of things. The only use the Chinese are allowed
to make of their history is didactic: their interest in history is
narrow, moralistic, deforming, uncurious. 

Hence, photography
in our sense has no place in their society.

The limits placed on photography in China only reflect the
character of their society, a society unified by an ideology of stark,
unremitting conflict. Our unlimited use of photographic images
not only reflects but gives shape to this society, one unified by
the denial of conflict. 

Our very notion of the world—the capitalist
twentieth century’s “one world”—is like a photographic overview.

The world is “one” not because it is united but because a tour of
its diverse contents does not reveal conflict but only an even more
astounding diversity. This spurious unity of the world is effected
by translating its contents into images. Images are always
compatible, or can be made compatible, even when the realities
they depict are not.

Photography does not simply reproduce the real, it recycles
it—a key procedure of a modern society. In the form of
photographic images, things and events are put to new uses,
assigned new meanings, which go beyond the distinctions between
the beautiful and the ugly, the true and the false, the useful and
the useless, good taste and bad. Photography is one of the chief means for producing that quality ascribed to things and situations
which erases these distinctions: “the interesting.” 

What makes
something interesting is that it can be seen to be like, or analogous
to, something else. There is an art and there are fashions of seeing
things in order to make them interesting; and to supply this art,
these fashions, there is a steady recycling of the artifacts and tastes
of the past. 

Clichés, recycled, become meta-clichés. The
photographic recycling makes clichés out of unique objects,
distinctive and vivid artifacts out of clichés. Images of real things
are interlayered with images of images. 

The Chinese circumscribe
the uses of photography so that there are no layers or strata of
images, and all images reinforce and reiterate each other.* 

We
make of photography a means by which, precisely, anything can
be said, any purpose served. What in reality is discrete, images
join. In the form of a photograph the explosion of an A-bomb
can be used to advertise a safe.

To us, the difference between the photographer as an individual
eye and the photographer as an objective recorder seems
fundamental, the difference often regarded, mistakenly, as
separating photography as art from photography as document.

But both are logical extensions of what photography means:

<!-- *The Chinese concern for the reiterative function of images (and of words) inspires
the distributing of additional images, photographs that depict scenes in which, clearly,
no photographer could have been present; and the continuing use of such photographs
suggests how slender is the population’s understanding of what photographic images
and picture-taking imply. In his book Chinese Shadows, Simon Leys gives an example
from the “Movement to Emulate Lei Feng,” a mass campaign of the mid-1960s to inculcate the ideals of Maoist citizenship built around the apotheosis of an Unknown
Citizen, a conscript named Lei Feng who died at twenty in a banal accident. Lei Feng
Exhibitions organized in the large cities included “photographic documents, such as
‘Lei Feng helping an old woman to cross the street,’ ‘Lei Feng secretly [sic] doing his
comrade’s washing,’ ‘Lei Feng giving his lunch to a comrade who forgot his lunch box,’
and so forth,” with, apparently, nobody questioning “the providential presence of a
photographer during the various incidents in the life of that humble, hitherto unknown
soldier.”  In China, what makes an image true is that it is good for people to see it. -->

note-taking on, potentially, everything in the world, from every
possible angle. The same Nadar who took the most authoritative
celebrity portraits of his time and did the first photo-interviews
was also the first photographer to take aerial views; and when he
performed “the Daguerreian operation” on Paris from a balloon
in 1855 he immediately grasped the future benefit of photography
to warmakers.


Two attitudes underlie this presumption that anything in the
world is material for the camera. One finds that there is beauty
or at least interest in everything, seen with an acute enough eye.

(And the aestheticizing of reality that makes everything, anything,
available to the camera is what also permits the co-opting of any
photograph, even one of an utterly practical sort, as art.) 

The
other treats everything as the object of some present or future
use, as matter for estimates, decisions, and predictions. According
to one attitude, there is nothing that should not be seen; according
to the other, there is nothing that should not be recorded. Cameras
implement an aesthetic view of reality by being a machine-toy
that extends to everyone the possibility of making disinterested
judgments about importance, interest, beauty. (“That would make
a good picture.”) 

Cameras implement the instrumental view of
reality by gathering information that enables us to make a more
accurate and much quicker response to whatever is going on. The
response may of course be either repressive or benevolent: military
reconnaissance photographs help snuff out lives, X-rays help save
them.

Though these two attitudes, the aesthetic and the instrumental,
seem to produce contradictory and even incompatible feelings
about people and situations, that is the altogether characteristic
contradiction of attitude which members of a society that divorces
public from private are expected to share in and live with. 

There is perhaps no activity which prepares us so well to live with
these contradictory attitudes as does picture-taking, which lends
itself so brilliantly to both. On the one hand, cameras arm vision
in the service of power—of the state, of industry, of science. On
the other hand, cameras make vision expressive in that mythical
space known as private life. 

In China, where no space is left over from politics and moralism for expressions of aesthetic sensibility,
only some things are to be photographed and only in certain ways.

For us, as we become further detached from politics, there is more and more free space to fill up with exercises of sensibility such as
cameras afford. One of the effects of the newer camera technology
(video, instant movies) has been to turn even more of what is done with cameras in private to narcissistic uses—that is, to
self-surveillance. 

But such currently popular uses of image-feedback in the bedroom, the therapy session, and the weekend conference seem far less momentous than video’s
potential as a tool for surveillance in public places. Presumably,
the Chinese will eventually make the same instrumental uses of
photography that we do, except, perhaps, this one. Our inclination
to treat character as equivalent to behavior makes more acceptable
a widespread public installation of the mechanized regard from
the outside provided by cameras. 

China’s far more repressive
standards of order require not only monitoring behavior but
changing hearts; there, surveillance is internalized to a degree
without precedent, which suggests a more limited future in their
society for the camera as a means of surveillance.

China offers the model of one kind of dictatorship, whose
master idea is “the good,” in which the most unsparing limits are
placed on all forms of expression, including images. The future
may offer another kind of dictatorship, whose master idea is “the
interesting,” in which images of all sorts, stereotyped and
eccentric, proliferate. 

Something like this is suggested in Nabokov’s Invitation to a Beheading. Its portrait of a model
totalitarian state contains only one, omnipresent art:
photography—and the friendly photographer who hovers around
the hero’s death cell turns out, at the end of the novel, to be the
headsman. 

There seems no way (short of undergoing a vast historical amnesia, as in China) of limiting the proliferation of photographic images. The only question is whether the function
of the image-world created by cameras could be other than it is.

The present function is clear enough, if one considers in what
contexts photographic images are seen, what dependencies they create, what antagonisms they pacify—that is, what institutions
they buttress, whose needs they really serve.

A capitalist society requires a culture based on images. 

It needs to furnish vast amounts of entertainment in order to stimulate buying and anesthetize the injuries of class, race, and sex. 

It needs to gather unlimited amounts of information, the better to exploit natural resources, increase productivity, keep order, make war, give jobs to bureaucrats. The camera’s twin capacities, to subjectivize reality and to objectify it, ideally serve these needs and strengthen them. Cameras define reality in the two ways essential to the workings of an advanced industrial society: as a spectacle (for masses) and as an object of surveillance (for rulers). 

The production of images also furnishes a ruling ideology. Social change is replaced by a change in images. The freedom to consume
a plurality of images and goods is equated with freedom itself.

The narrowing of free political choice to free economic
consumption requires the unlimited production and consumption
of images.


The final reason for the need to photograph everything lies in the very logic of consumption itself. To consume means to burn, to
use up—and, therefore, to need to be replenished. 

As we make images and consume them, we need still more images; and still
more. But images are not a treasure for which the world must be
ransacked; they are precisely what is at hand wherever the eye
falls. 

Having a camera can inspire something like lust which cannot be satisfied because:

1. The possibilities of photography are infinite
2. The project is finally self-devouring

The attempts by photographers to bolster up a depleted sense of reality contribute to the depletion. 

Our oppressive sense of the transience of everything is more acute since cameras gave us the means to “fix” the fleeting moment. 

We consume images at an ever faster rate and, as Balzac suspected cameras used up layers of the body, images consume reality. 

Cameras are the antidote and the disease, a means of appropriating reality and a means of making it obsolete.

Photography has de-Platonized our understanding of reality, making it less plausible to reflect on our experience according to the distinction between images and things, between copies and originals. 

It suited Plato’s derogatory attitude toward images to liken them to shadows—transitory, minimally informative, immaterial, impotent co-presences of the real things which cast them. 

But the force of photographic images comes from their being material realities.

<!-- , richly informative deposits left in the wake of whatever emitted them, potent means for turning the tables on reality—for turning it into a shadow.  -->

Images are more real than anyone could have supposed. 

Images are an unlimited resource, one that cannot be exhausted by consumerist waste. This is why the conservationist remedy should be applied. 

If there can be a better way for the real world to include the ecology of images, it will require an ecology not only of real things but of images as well