---
heading: Proposition 31
title: "Projectivle"
description: "The motions of bodies which are resisted partly in the ratio of the velocities, and partly"
author: Newton
draft: true
c: "firebrick"
---



## Proposition 31 Problem 12

Find the horary motion of the nodes of the moon in an elliptic orbit

Let:
- Qjpmaq represent an ellipsis with the greater axis Qq, and the lesser axis ab QAqB a circle circumscribed
- T is the earth in the common centre of both
- S the sun
- p is the moon moving in this ellipsis 
- pm is an arc which it describes in the least moment of time
- N and n are the nodes joined by the line Nn 
- pK and mk are perpendiculars upon the axis Qq produced both ways till they meet the circle in P and M, and the line of the nodes in D and d

If the moon, by a radius drawn to the earth, describes an area proportional to the time of description, the horary motion of the node in the ellipsis will be as the area pDdm and AZ2 conjunctly.

Let PF touch the circle in P, and produced meet
in F; arid pj
AZ
TN
same TN in /, and both
ML represent the space
pDdm
PF
ellipsis in p, and produced meet the
in the axis TQ, at Y.
concur
And let
tangents
which the moon, by the impulse of the above-mentioned force
touch the
3IT
or
3PK,
would describe with a transverse motion, in the meantime while revolving
in the circle it describes the arc
and ml denote the space which the
PM
;
moon revolving
in the ellipsis would describe in the same time by the im
and -let
and Ip be produced till
of
the
same
force SIT or
pulse
in
and
and
and
meet
the
of
the
be joined,
ecliptic
g,
they
plane
3PK
LP
;
FG
G
of which
FG
R
TQ
ively and/0&quot;
in the circle is to the force
;
as
AT
to
produced may cut pf, pa; and TQ, in c, e, and
respect
in r.
Because the force SIT or 3PK
produced may cut
PK
SIT
ML
T, the space
or 3/?K in the ellipsis as
to /?K, or
will
the
be to the
former
force
generated by
PK to
that
because
FR to cR. But (because
PLM, PGF) ML is to FG as PL to PG. that is
space ml generated by the latter as
similar figures PYK/? and FYRc, as
p&quot;K
of the
is,

similar triangles
count of the parallels L/r,
of the
(on ac
PK, GR), as pi to pe, that is (because of the
similar triangles plm, cpe), as lm to ce ; and inversely as LM is to lm, or
And therefore if fg was to ce as/// to
as FR is to cR, so is FG to ce.
cY, that is, as fr to cR (that is, as fr to FR and FR to cR conjunctly,
that
is,
as/T
to
FG
FT, and
to ce conjunctly), because the ratio of
FG
FG
and/T to FT,
expunged on both sides, leaves the ratios fg to
as/T to FT; and, therefore, the angles which
fg would be to
would be equal to each other. But
and/- would subtend at the earth
to ce,
FG
FG
T
these angles (by
what we have shewn
in the preceding Proposition) are the
motions of the nodes, while the moon describes in the circle the arc PM,
in the ellipsis the arc jt?w; and therefore the motions of the nodes in the
circle
and in the
ellipsis
would be equal
to
each other.

Thus, would
be, if
fg
was
to cc
as/Y
to
cY, that
But because of the similar triangles/?/?,
equal to
therefore/?- is
tends in fact is to
;
cep,
this/^ or-
tl;^
r
if/, was oqual to
fg
is to cc
/Y
^
as//? to cp
;
.
anJ
and therefore the angle which fg sub
the former angle which
motion of the nodes in
circle aa
-
is,
ellipsis is
FG subterds.
to the
that
is to
say, the
motion of the same in the
to the forrer/o- or
,
that
is,
as//?
XTHE MATHEMATICAL PRINCIPLES
432
cY to/ Y X
in h, as
DP, and
or DJO to
to/ Y, and cY
cp, or as//?
TN meet FP
FA
to
therefore
FY
to
cjo
that
is ; if
ph
AZ
2
motion of the nodes in the
COR. Since,
the areas
any given position of the nodes, the sum of all
in the time while the moon is carried from the quadra

horary motion of the nodes in the circle,
conjunctly will be proportional to the horary
ellipsis.
therefore, in
ture to any place
ellipsis
parallel to
F Y to FP that is, as Fh to FP
as the area Dpmd to the area DPMc?.
And,
Prop. XXX) the latter area and AZ con-
and
therefore, seeing (by Corol. 1,
junctly are proportional to the
the former area and
111.
tn, is
the area
and the sum of
mpQ&d
all those
terminated at the tangent of the
areas, in
T
o ne entire revolution, is
the area of the whole ellipsis the mean motion of the nodes in the ellip
sis will be to the mean motion of the nodes in the circle as the
ellipsis to
;
the circle
Corol
3
2,
iv
.
Ta
XXX) the
Prop.
7
to
is
as
that

to the angle
to
TA,
or
69
to 70.
And,
therefore, since (by
mean horary motion of the nodes in the circle
21
as AZ 2 to AT 2 if we take the angle
35
16 iv 36 V as 69 to 70. the mean horary mo

3 iv 30 V as
tion of the nodes in the ellipsis will be to 16&quot; 21
to
2
that is, as the square of the sine of the distance of the node from

the sun to the square of the radius.
But the moon, by a radius drawn to the earth, describes the area in the
syzygie-s with a greater velocity than it does that in the quadratures, and
upon that account the time is contracted in the syzygies, and prolonged in
the quadratures and together with the time the motion of the nodes is
But the moment of the area in the
likewise augmented or diminished.
moment thereof in the syzygies as
to
the
of
the
moon
was
quadrature
;
10973
to
11073
;
and therefore the mean moment
in the octants is to the
excess in the syzygies. and to the defect in the quadratures, as 1 1023, the
Wherefore since
half sum of those numbers, to their half difference 50.
1
moon in the several little equal parts of its orbit is recip
as
its
rocally
velocity, the mean time in the -octants will be to the excess
of the time in the quadratures, and to the defect of the lime in the syzy
the time of the
from this cause, nearly as 11023 to 50. But, reckoning from
the quadratures to the syzygies, I find that the excess of the moments of
the area, in the several places above the least moment in the quadratures,
gies arising
nearly as the square of the sine of the moon s distance from the quad
ratures and therefore the difference betwixt the moment in any place,
and the mean moment in the octants, is as the difference betwixt the square
is
:
moon s distance from the quadratures, and the square
and the in
of the sine of 45 degrees, or half the square of the radius
crement of the time in the several places between the octants and quad
and syzygies, is in
ratures, and the decrement thereof between the octants
of the sine of the
;
nodes, while the moon de
scribes the several little equal parts of its orbit, is accelerated or retarded
the
same proportion.

But the motion of the
time
in the duplicate proportion of the
describes
PM,
is
;
433
for that motion, while the
ML. and
ML
moou
the duplicate
Wherefore the motion of the nodes in the syzy-
parilms) as
(cceteris
is
in
proportion of the time.
gj-es, in the time while the
moon describes given little parts of its orbit,
diminished in the duplicate proportion of the number H07. J to the num
ber 11023= and the decrement is to the remaining motion as 100 to
10973 but to the whole motion as 100 to 11073 nearly. But the decrement
in the places between the octants and syzygies, and the increment in
the places between the octants and quadratures, is to this decrement nearly
as the whole motion in these places to the whole motion in the syzygies,
and the difference betwixt the square of the sine of the moon s distance
from the quadrature, and the half square of the radius,
to the half square
Wherefore, if the nodes are in the quadratures,
and we take two places, one on one side, one on the other, equally distant
from the octant and other two distant by the same interval, one from the
of the radius conjunctly.
syzygy, the other from the quadrature, and from the decrements of the
motions in the two places between the syzygy and octant we subtract the
increments of the motions in the two other places between the octant and
the quadrature, the remaining decrement will be equal to the decre
ment in the syzygy,
the
as will by computation easily appear
mean decrement, which should and therefore
mean motion be subducted from the
The the fourth part of the decrement in the syzygy.
whole horary motion of the nodes in the syzygies (when the moon by a ra
dius drawn to the earth was supposed to describe an area proportional to
of the nodes,
is
the time) was the motion of the nodes, in

We have shewn that the decrement of
the time while the moon, now moving with
describes the
same space, was to this motion as 100 to
greater velocity,
The fourth part
therefore
decrement
is 17
43 iv 11 v
and
this
1.1073;
V
iv
25 . 48 subtracted from the mean horary motion above
of which 4

found, 16&quot; 21
rary motion.
//;
3 iv 30 V leaves

If the nodes are without the quadratures, their correct
mean ho and two places are considered,
one on the other, equally distant from the syzygies, the
sum of the motions of the nodes, when the moon is in those places, will be
one on one
side,
to the sum of their motions, when the
2
nodes in the quadratures, as
to
motions arising from the causes but
AZ
moon
AT
is
.
same places and the
the decrements of the
in the
And
2
now explained will be mutually as
the motions themselves, and therefore the remaining motions will be mu
2
2
to
and the mean motions will be
tually betwixt themselves as
AZ
AT
;
as the remaining motions.
And, therefore, in
nodes, their correct mean horary motion is to
AT
2
that
any given position of the
37 iv 42 V as AZ 2
16
&quot;
16&quot;
is, as the square of the sine of the
from the syzygies to the square of the radius.
to distance of the nodes