---
heading: Proposition 26
title: "Projectivle"
description: "The motions of bodies which are resisted partly in the ratio of the velocities, and partly"
author: Newton
draft: true
c: "firebrick"
---




## Proposition 26 Problem 7

Find the horary increment of the area which the moon, by a radius drawn to the earth, describes in a circular orbit.

The area which the moon describes drawn by a radius to the earth proportional to
the time of description, excepting in so far
as
motion
the
is
moon s
disturbed
by the action of the
and here we
sun
;
propose to investi
increment
of
or
the
HI
the
of that area or
moment,
horary
equality
gate
motion so disturbed. To render the calculus more easy, we shall suppose
the orbit of the moon to be circular, and neglect all inequalities but that
the immense dis
only which is now under consideration and, because of
tance of the sun, we shall farther suppose that the lines SP and ST are
will be always reduced to its mean
parallel.
By this moans, the force
;
LM
TM
These
to its mean quantity 3PK.
quantity TP, as well as the force
and
force
the
forces (by Cor. 2 of the Laws of Motion) compose
radius
the
LE
TP, is
this force, by letting fall the perpendicular
upon
force
the
resolved into the forces TE, EL of which
TE, acting constantly
in the direction of the radius TP, neither accelerates nor retards the de
TL
TP
but EL, acting on
made by that radius
scription of the area
the radius
in a perpendicular direction, accelerates or retards the de
retards the moon.
scription of the area in proportion as it accelerates
TPC

acceleration of the moon, in its passage from the quadrature C to the
A, is in every moment of time as the generating accclerative
That
conjunction
TK
3PK X
force
that
EL,
is,
as
Let the time be represented by the
.
.5
mean motion of the moon, or (which comes to the same thing) by the angle
CTP, or even by the arc CP. At right angles upon CT erect CG equal
to
CT
;
and, supposing the quadrantal arc
AC to be
divided into an infinite
number of equal parts P/?, &c., these parts may represent the like infinite
number of the equal parts of time. Let fall pic perpendicular on CT, and
draw TG meeting with KP, kp produced in F arid /; then will FK be
equal to
tion
and K/v be
TK,
and therefore
;
EL:
FK X
PK
as
to T/?, that
P/&amp;gt;
or the area
K&,
is,
of all the forces
EL
impressed upon the
GCKF
moon
propor-
TK
3PK
X
-
~^pp
&amp;gt;
will be as the
in the whole time
CP
;
sum, that is, as the ac
or as the increment of the
also as the velocity generated by that
and therefore
celeration of the description of the area CTP,
moment thereof. The force by which the moon
CADB
in a given
is,
will be as
FKkf,
and compounding, the whole area
that sum
as
to
may
in
its
periodic time
7 h 43 be retained revolving about the earth in rest at the
distance TP, would cause a body falling in the time CT to describe the
length ^CT, and at the same time to acquire a velocity equal to that with
of 27
1
which the moon
IV.,
Book
part of
EL
is
But
I.
EL, and equal
in the octants,
proportion of 3 to 2
in its periodic
100
moved
to |
X
time
This appears from Cor.
drawn perpendicular on TP, is but
in its orbit.
since K.d,
to the half of
where
;
it is
TP,
and therefore will be
may
ML,
or
greatest, will
FK
ML
in the
by which the moon
to that force
revolving about the earth at rest as
will generate a ve
be retained
CT
yylfs parts of the velocity of the moon
;
but in the time
CA
CPA
TP.
Prop,
a third
in the octants, the force
exceed the force
178721, or 11915; and in the time
locity equal to
9,
CT
to
or
will generate a greater velocity in the proportion of
in the octants be represented by the area
Let the greatest force
X Kk, or by the rectangle |TP X Pp, which is equal thereto; and
EL
the velocity which that greatest force can generate in any time CP will be
to the velocity which any other lesser force
can generate in the same
EL
KCGF
but the velocities
time as the rectangle |TP X CP to the area
in
the
time
CPA
will
be
one
to
other
as the rectangle
whole
the
generated
2-TP
radius
X CA
TP
;
to the triangle
TCG,
and therefore the
CA
to the
the quadrantal arc
in
the
whole
time
velocity generated
or as
latter
;
will be T T$TJ parts of the velocity of the
moon.
To
this velocity of the
mean moment of the area (supposing
this mean moment to be represented by the number 11915), we add and
the sum 11915 + 50, or 11965,
subtract the half of the other velocity
and the
will represent the greatest moment of the area in the syzygy A
moon, which
is
proportional to the


11915
50, or 11865, the least moment thereof in the quadra
Therefore the areas which in equal times are described in the syzy-
difference
tures.
and quadratures are one to^the other as 11965 to 11865. And if to
moment 11865 we add a moment which shall be to 100, the dif
gies
the least
FKCG
ference of the two former moments, as the trapezium
to the
triangle
to
or, which comes to the same thing, as the square of the sine
PK
TCG,
TP
Pd
TP), the sum will represent
is in any intermediate
place P.
the hypothesis that the sun and the
the square of the radius
(that is, as
the moment of the area when the moon
to
But these things take place only in
earth are at rest, and that the synodical revolution of the moon is finished
in 27 7 h 43
But since the moon s synodical period is really 29 a 12 h
4 T, the increments of the moments must be enlarged in the same propor
1
.
tion
.
.
time
the
as
.
is,
that
is,
in
the proportion of
1080853
to
.
1000000.
Upon whicli account, the whole increment, which was parts of the
mean moment, will now become T Y| parts thereof; and therefore the
moment of the area in the quadrature of the moon will be to the moment
3-
thereof in the syzygy as 11023
11073; and to the moment thereof,
The
area,
m
describes
number
the
= 100.
10973 -f Pd ; that is, supposing TP
therefore, which the moon, by a radius drawn
10973
place P, as
50 to 11023 + 50; or as 10973 to
when the moon is in any intermediate
to
from the nearest quadrature, considered in a
Thus
radius.
3ut
if the
to the earth,
the several little equal parts of time, is nearly as the sum of
219,46, and the versed sine of the double distance of the moon
it is
when
circle
which hath unity for
variation there
is
greater or
less,
that
its
mean quantity.
versed sine must be aug-
the variation in the octants
is
in its
nented or diminished in the same proportion.


## Proposition 27 Problem 8

The horary
every,
motion of the moon
to find its distance from the earth.


area which the moon, by a radius drawn to the earth, describes in
of time, is as the horary motion of the moon and the square
moment
moon from the earth conjunctly. And therefore
moon from the earth is in a proportion compounded of
of the distance of the the
distance of the the
subduplicate proportion of the area directly, and the subduplioate propor
tion of the horary motion inversely.


### Corollary 1

The apparent diameter of the moon is given for it is reciprocally as the distance of the moon from the earth.

Let astronomers

how
accurately this rule agrees with the phenomena.
Hence also the orbit of the moon may be more exactly defined
from the phaenomena than hitherto could be done.
