---
heading: Chapter 7
title: "The Actual Contributors to Public Consumption"
weight: 144
c: firebrick
description: "Besides the wants of individuals and of families which it is the object of private consumption to satisfy, the collection of many individuals into a community gives rise to a new class of wants, the wants of the society in its aggregate capacity, the satisfaction of which is the object of public consumption"
writer:
  name: Jean Baptiste Say
  url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jean-Baptiste_Say
icon: Jean Baptiste Say
---




A portion of the objects of public consumption have, in some very rare instances, been provided by a private individual.

We see occasional acts of private munificence, in the erection of a hospital, the laying out of a road, or of public gardens upon the land, and at the cost, of an individual. In ancient times, examples of this kind were more frequent, though much less meritorious. The private opulence of the ancients was commonly the fruit of domestic, or provincial, plunder and peculation, or perhaps the spoil of a hostile nation. purchased with the blood of fellow-citizens. 

Among the moderns, though such excesses do sometimes occur, individual wealth is, in the great majority of cases, the fruit of personal industry and economy. 

In England, where there are so many institutions founded and supported by private funds, most of the fortunes of the founders and supporters have been acquired in industrious occupations. It requires a greater exertion of generosity to sacrifice wealth, acquired by a long course of toil and self-denial, than to give away what has been obtained by a stroke of good fortune, or even by an act of lucky temerity.

Be it as it may, on the sides of the road I am speaking of, there is a space of 120 feet, that might be restored to cultivation; that is to say. 48 acres to the ordinary league. 

Add together the rent of the surplus land, the interest of the sum expended in the first cost and preparation, and the annual charge of
keeping up the unnecessary space, which is something, badly as it is kept up; you will then ascertain the sum France pays
annually for the very questionable honour of having roads too wide, by more than the half, leading to streets too narrow, by 3/4. 

Roads and canals are costly public works, even in countries where they are under judicious and economical management.
Yet, probably, in most cases, the benefits they afford to the community far exceed the charges. Of this the reader may be
convinced, on reference to what has been said above of the value generated by the mere commercial operation of transfer from one spot to another, 61 and of the general rule, that every saving in the charges of production is so much gain to

Among the Romans, a further portion of the public consumption was supplied directly by the vanquished nations who were subjected to a tribute which the victors consumed. 

In most modern states, there is some territorial property vested, either in the nation at large, or in the subordinate communities, cities, towns, and villages, which is leased out, or occppied directly by the public. In France, most of the public lands of tillage and pasturage, with their appurtenances, are let out on lease; the, government reserving only the national forests under the direct administration of its agents. The produce of the whole forms a considerable item in the catalogue of public resources.

But local administration and local institutions of utility, pleasure. instruction, or beneficence, appear to yield a benefit exclusively to the place or district where they are situated.

Wherefore, it should seem, that their expenses ought to fall, as in most countries they do, upon the local population. 

Not but that the nation at large derives some benefit from good
provincial administration, or institutions. A stranger has access to the public places, libraries, schools, walks, and hospi-
tals of the district; but the principal benefit unquestionably
results to the immediate neighbourhood. It is good economy
to leave the administration of the local receipts and disburse-
ments to the local authorities; particularly where they are
appointed by those, whose funds they administer. There is
much less waste, when the money is spent under the eye of
those who contribute it, and who are to reap the benefit; be-
sides, the expense is better proportioned to the advantage
expected. When one passes through a city or town badly paved
and ill-conditioned, or sees a canal or harbour in a state of
dilapidation, one may conclude, in nine cases out of ten, that
the authorities, who are to administer the funds appropriated
to those objects, do not reside on the spot.

But these resources consist, for the most part, of the produce of taxes levied upon the subjects or citizens. These taxes are sometimes national, that is, levied upon the whole nation, and paid into the general treasury of the state, whence the public national expenditure is defrayed; and sometimes local, or provincial, that is, levied upon the inhabitants of a certain
canton or province only, and paid into the local treasury, whence are defrayed the local expenses.

It is a principle of equity, that consumption should be charged to those who derive gratification from it; consequently, those countries must be pronounced to be the best governed, in respect of taxation, where each class of inhabitants contributes in taxation proportionately to the benefit derived by it from the expenditure.

Every individual and class in the community is benefitted by the central administration, or, in other words, the general gov-
ernment, so likewise of the security afforded by the national military establishment; for the provinces can hardly be se-
cure from external attack, if the enemy have possession of the metropolis, and can thence overawe and control them;
imposing laws upon districts where his force has not penetrated. and disposing of the lives and property even of such
as have not seen the face of an enemy. For the same reason the charge of fortresses, arsenals, and diplomatic agents is
properly thrown upon the whole community. In this particular, small states have an advantage over more
extensive ones. They have more enjoyment from a less expenditure upon objects of public utility or amusement; be-
cause they are at hand to see that the funds, destined to the object, are faithfully applied.
It would seem, that the administration of justice should be classed among the general charges, although the security and
advantage it affords have more of a local character. 

When the magistracy of Bordeaux arrests and tries an offender, the public internal security of France is unquestionably promoted.
The charge of gaols and courthouses necessarily follows that of the magistracy= Smith has expressed an opinion, that civil
justice should be defrayed by the litigating parties; which would be more practicable than at present, were the judges in
the appointment of the parties in each particular case, and no otherwise in the nomination of the public authority, than in-
asmuch as the choice might be limited to specified persons of 
approved knowledge and integrity. They would then be arbitrators, and a sort of equitable jurors, and might be paid pro-
portionately to the matter in dispute without regard to the length of the suit; and would thus have an obvious interest in
simplifying the process, and sparing their own time and trouble, as well as in attracting business by the general equity
of their decisions.

