---
heading: Articles 63-
title: "Temporary Constitutional Provisions Act"
weight: 24
c: "darkslategray"
description: ""
icon: "Brazil"
---



Article 63.  A Committee composed of nine members is hereby created, three of them
from the Legislative Power, three from the Judicial Power and three from the Executive
Power, to promote the commemorations of the centennial of the proclamation of the
Republic and of the promulgation of the first republican Constitution of the country,
and such committee may, at its discretion, be subdivided into as many subcommittees
as may be necessary.

In the carrying out of its duties the Committee shall conduct
studies, debates and assessments of the political, social, economic and cultural
development of the country, and may join efforts with state and municipal governments
and with public and private institutions desiring to take part in the events.

Article 64.  The National Press and other printing departments of the Union, the states,
the Federal District and the municipalities, of the direct or indirect administration,
including foundations instituted and maintained by the Government, shall provide for
a popular edition of the full text of the Constitution, which shall be made available
free of charge, to schools and public registry offices, to unions, military barracks,
churches and other community organizations, in order that each Brazilian citizen may
receive from the State a copy of the Brazilian Constitution.

Article 65.  The Legislative Power shall, within twelve months, regulate the article
220, paragraph 4.

Article 66.  The public telecommunications utility concessions presently in force
shall be maintained, as established by law.

Article 67.  The Union shall conclude the demarcation of the Indian lands within
five years of the promulgation of the Constitution.

Article 68. Final ownership shall be recognized for the remaining members of the
ancient runaway slave communities who are occupying their lands and the State shall grant them the respective title deeds.

Article 69. The states shall be allowed to maintain legal consultancy offices
independent from their Attorney-General Offices or Advocacy-General Offices,
provided that they have separate agencies for the respective functions on the date of
the promulgation of this Constitution.

Article 70. The present competence of the state courts shall be maintained until it
is defined in the State Constitution, as established in article 125, paragraph 1, of the
Constitution.

Article 71. The Emergency Social Fund is hereby instituted for the fiscal years
of 1994 and 1995, as well as for the periods from January 1, 1996 through June 30,
1997, and from July 1, 1997 through December 31, 1999, aiming at the financial
recuperation of the Federal Public Finances and the economic stabilization, the
resources of which shall be applied primarily to the actions of the health and education
systems, including the supplementation of resources set forth in paragraph 3 of article
60 of the Temporary Constitutional Provisions Act, the welfare benefits and welfare
assistance of a permanent nature, including the payment of welfare debts and budgetary
expenditures associated to programs of great economic and social interest. (RCA No.
1, 1994; CA No. 10, 1996; CA No. 17, 1997)

Paragraph 1. The provision of the final part of item II of paragraph 9 of article
165 of the Constitution shall not apply to the Fund established by this article.

Paragraph 2. From the beginning of the 1996 fiscal year on, the Fund established
by this article shall be called Fiscal Stabilization Fund.

Paragraph 3. The Executive Power shall publish, on a bimonthly basis, a budget
execution statement, which statement shall list the sources and applications of the
Fund established by this article.

Article 72. The Emergency Social Fund is comprised of: (RCA No. 1, 1994; CA
No. 10, 1996; CA No. 17, 1997)

1. the proceeds from the collection of the tax on income and earnings of
any nature to be levied at source on payments of any nature effected by the Union,
including its autonomous government agencies and foundations;

2.  the part of the proceeds from the collection of the tax on income and
earnings of any nature, and of the tax on credit, foreign exchange and insurance
transactions, or transactions relating to bonds and securities, resulting from the changes
generated by Law 8,894 of June 21, 1994, and by Laws 8,849 and 8,848, both dated
January 28, 1994 and further modifications;

3.   the part of the proceeds from the collection due to the increase of the
rate of welfare contribution on the profit of taxpayers mentioned in paragraph 1 of
article 22 of Law 8,212 of July 24, 1991, which, in the fiscal years of 1994 and 1995,
as well as in the period from January 1, 1996 through June 30, 1997, shall be of 30
percent, subject to modification by ordinary law, the other stipulations of Law 7,869
of December 15, 1988 remaining unchanged;

4. twenty percent of the proceeds from the collection of all taxes and
contributions to the Union, already instituted or to be instituted, except those provided
by items I, II and III, with due regard to the provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4;

5. the part of the proceeds from the collection of the contribution mentioned
in Supplementary Law no. 7, of September 7, 1970, owed by the juridical entities
referred to in item III of this article, which will be calculated, in the fiscal years of
Temporary Constitutional Provisions Act
1851994 and 1995, as well as in the periods from January 1, 1996 through June 30, 1997,
and from July 1, 1997 through December 31, 1999, through the employment of a
rate of seventy-five hundredths of one percent, subject to modification by subsequent
ordinary law, on the gross operating income, as defined in the legislation of income
tax and earnings of any nature;

6.  other incomes defined in specific legislation.

Paragraph 1. The rates and calculation base defined in items III and V shall
be applied as from the first day of the month following the ninetieth day after the
promulgation of this Amendment 17 .

Paragraph 2. The parts referred to in items I, II, III and V shall be previously deducted
from the calculation base of any legal or constitutional designation or participation, and
the provisions of articles 159, 212 and 239 of the Constitution shall not apply to them.

Paragraph 3. The part referred to in item IV shall be previously deducted from the
calculation base of any constitutional or legal designation or participation stipulated
by articles 153, paragraph 5, 157, II, 212 and 239 of the Constitution.

Paragraph 4. The provision of the former paragraph shall not apply to the resources
provided by articles 158, II and 159 of the Constitution.

Paragraph 5. The part of the resources originating from the tax on income and
earnings of any nature, designated for the Emergency Social Fund, as provided by
item II of this article, shall not exceed five and six-tenths of one percent of the total
proceeds from its collection.

Article 73.  In the regulation of the Emergency Social Fund, the instrument provided
by item V of article 59 of the Constitution may not be applied. (RCA No. 1, 1994)

Article 74.  The Union may establish provisional contribution on the movement or
transmission of monies and of credits and rights of financial nature. (CA No. 12, 1996)

Paragraph 1. The rate of the contribution mentioned in this article shall not exceed
twenty-five hundredths of one percent, and the Executive Power may reduce it or
reestablish it, in whole or in part, in the conditions and limits provided for by law.

Paragraph 2. The provisions of articles 153, paragraph 5, and 154, I, of the
Constitution shall not apply to the contribution mentioned in this article.

Paragraph 3. The whole of the proceeds from the collection of the contribution
mentioned in this article shall be allocated to the National Health Foundation for the financing of health actions and services.

Paragraph 4. The liability for the contribution mentioned in this article shall be
governed by the provisions of article 195, paragraph 6, of the Constitution, and it
shall not be collected for longer than two years.

Article 75.  The collection of the provisional contribution on the movement or
transmission of monies and of credits and rights of financial nature mentioned in
article 74, established by Law no. 9,311, of October 24, 1996, is extended for 36 months, and the same extension applies to the effect of Law no. 9,539, of December
12, 1997, which modified Law no. 9,311. (CA No. 21, 1999)

Paragraph 1. With due regard for paragraph 6 of article 195 of the Federal
Constitution, the rate of the contribution shall be thirty-eight hundredths of one percent,
in the first twelve months, and thirty hundredths in the subsequent months, and the
Executive Power may reduce it, in whole or in part, in the limits hereby stipulated.

Paragraph 2. The proceeds from increased collection of the contribution, resulting
from the alteration of the rate, during the financial years of 1999, 2000, and 2001,
shall be allocated to the financing of social security.

Paragraph 3. The Union is authorized to issue domestic public debt bonds, whose
resources shall be allocated to the financing of health services and social security, in
an amount equivalent to the proceeds of the collection of the contribution, estimated
but not achieved in 1999.

