---
heading: Proposition 78
title: "Finding the orbits from the focus given"
description: "Make a body move in a trajectory that revolves around the center of force in the same way as another body in the same trajectory at rest"
author: Newton
draft: true
c: "firebrick"
---


## Proposition 78 Theorem 38

If spheres
it*
dissimilar
the progress
a-&amp;gt;id
from
the centre to the circumference be hoivMtv
unequable, but similar on every side round about af all
given distances from the centre ; and the attractive force of evsrt/
point be as the distance of the attracted body ; I say, that the entire
force with which two spheres of this kind attract each other mutitallij
proportional to the distance between the centres of the spheres.
is demonstrated from the
foregoing Proposition, in the same man
ner as Proposition 76 was demonstrated from Proposition 75 is
This
X
COR. Those things that were above demonstrated in Prop.
and LXJV,
of the motion of bodies round the centres of conic sections, take place when
made by the force of sphaerical bodies of the condi
and the attracted bodies are spheres of the same kind.
the attractions are
all
tion above described,

## SCHOLIUM

i
have now explained the two principal cases of attractions;
to wit,
forces decrease in a duplicate ratio of the distances
r increase in a simple ratio of the distances,
causing the bodies in botli
when the centripetal

1
and composing sphaerical bodies whose
law of increase or decrease in the recess
the
observe
same
forces
centripetal
from the centre as the forces of the particles themselves do which is verv
cases to revolve in conic sections,
;
would be tedious to run over the other cases, whose con
clusions are less elegant and important, so particularly as I have done
I choose rather to comprehend and determine them all by one gen
these.
remarkable.
eral
method
It
as follows.

## Lemma 29

be described any circle as AEB, and about the
ff about the centre S there
centre P there be. also described two circles EF, ef, cutting the Jirst in
E and e, and the line PS in F and f and there be let fall to PS the
;
EF
I say, that
ef
if the distance of the arcs
;
be supposed to be infinitely diminished, the last ratio of the evanscent
to
linr Dd to the evanescent line Ff is the same as that of the line
perpendiculars
ed
ED,
;
PE
the live PS.
For
if
the line Pe cut the arc
EF
in q
;
and the right line Ee, which
coincides with the evanescent arc Ee, be produced, and meet the right line
and there be let fall from S to
PS in
the perpendicular
then,
T
PE
;
DTE,
because of the like triangles
))T
TE,
to
or
DE
VIII, and Cor. 3,
to
SG
;
to
ES
Dd to Ee so
ESG (by Lem.
;
DES,
it
will be as
and because the
triangles, Ee?,
similar, it will be as Ee to eq or
to Ff so
to
that is (because of the
Lem. VII) are
and, ex ceqno, as
similar triangles

PDE
;
Dd
PGS),
DE
so is
PE
to
F/soES
SG
PS.

## PROPOSITION 79 THEOREM 39

Suppose a superficies as EFfe to have its breadth infinitely diminished, and to be just vanishing ; and that the same superficies by its revolution round the axis PS describes a spherical concavo-convex solid, to the several equnJ particle* of which there tend equal centripetal forces that the force with which thit solid attracts a corpuscle situate 
P
DE
2
a ratio compounded of the ratio of the solid
X Ff and
the ratio of the force with which the given particle in the place Ff
in
is in
would attract the same corpuscle.
For if we consider, first, the force of
the spherical superficies
FE which

generated by the revolution of the arc FE,
and is cut any where, as in r, by the line&amp;lt;/6,
the annular part of the super cies generated
is
J
by the revolution of the arc rE will be as the
re-
lineola Dd, the radius of the sphere
PE
mainiag the same; as Archimedes has de
monstrated in his Book of the Sphere and
And the force of this super
Cylinder.
ficies exerted in the direction of the lines PE
Pr
situate all round in the conical superficies, will be as this annular
superficies itself; that is as the lineola DC/, or, which is the same, as the
of the sphere and the lineola DC/ ; but
rectangle under the given radius
or
PE
that force, exerted in the direction of the line PS tending to the centre S,
will be less in the ratio PI) to PE, and therefore will be as
X DC/.
PD
Suppose now
ticles,
DF
to be divided into
innumerable
each of which call DC/, and then the superficies
into so
FE
little
PD X
-
FE
now
the superficies
be drawn into the altitude F/; and the force
2
X Ff;
EF/e exerted upon the corpuscle P will be as
if the force be given which any given particle as Ff exerts upon
DE
of the solid
that
equal par
will be divided
equal annuli, whose forces will be as the sum of all the rec
2
DC/, that is, as |PF
|PD 2 ; and therefore as DE-.
many
tangles
Let
the line
is,
P
the corpuscle
at the distance
force of the solid
PF.
But
if
will be as the solid
EF/e
that force be not given, the
2
that force not
DE X Ff and
Q.E.D.
given, conjunctly.
PROPOSITION LXXX. THEOREM XL.
If
to the several
equal parts of a sphere
ABE
described about the centre
there tend equal centripetal forces ; and from the several points I)
in which a corpuscle, as F, is placed,
in the axis of the sphere
S
AB
DE
there be erected the perpendiculars
if in those perpendiculars the lengths
DE X PS
meeting the sphere in E, and
be taken as the quantity
DN
2
-,
,
and as
th* force
which a particle of the sphere situate
in,
PE
upon the corpuscle P conjunctly ; ]
is attracted to
say, that the in hole force with which the, corpuscle
wards the sphere is as the area ANB, comprehended under the axis of
the axis exerts at the distance
P
the sphere
AB, and
the curve line
For supposing the construction
ANB,
the locus of the point N.
in the last
stand, conceive the axis of the sphere
AB
Lemma
to be divided
and Theorem
to
into innumerable
equal particles DC/, and the whole sphere to be divided into so many sphe
concavo-convex laminae EF/e / and erect the perpendicular dn. By
the last Theorem, the force with which the laminas EF/e attracts the cor
rical
puscle
P
is
as
DE X Ff
2
and the force of one particle exerted at the

PE
distance
or PF, conjunctly.
is to
(by the last Lemma)
as
to PS, and therefore F/
Dd
But
F/
PE
.
is
I.
equal to
PE
;
DE X
2
and
DE X PS
PET~
2
F/ is
equal to
Dd X
and therefore the force of the
;
la-
DE X PS
2
mina EF/e is as Do? X
and the force of a particle exerted at the distance
by the supposition, as
Therefore the forces of
all
DN X
all
the areas DN//G?, that
whole area ANB.
COR. Hence
1.
D(/
7
or
as
that is,
conjunctly
evanescent area DNwrf.
;
the lamina) exerted upon the corpuscle P are as
the whole force of the sphere will be as the
is,
Q.E.D.
the certripetal force tending to
if
remain always the same at
all distances,
and
the several particles
p)F 2
DN
made
be
vx
;
is
attracted by the sphere
is
DE
X
-
2
the force with which the corpuscle
be as the area
3.
it,
P is
and
DN
be
made
as
PS
^^
,
attracted by the whole sphere wil]
ANB.
Jf the centripetal force
of the particles be reciprocally as the
cube of the distance of the corpuscle attracted by
T)F 2
as
the centripetal force of the particles be reciprocally as the
2. If
distance of the corpuscle attracted by
Cor.
po
as
Jr Jli
the whole force with which the corpuscle
the area ANB.
COR.
the
PT?~
PF
it,
and
DN
be
made
as
y PS
+++
.
the force with
sphere will be as the area
which the corpuscle
is
attracted by the whole
ANB.
And
universally if the centripetal force tending to the several
of
the
sphere be supposed to be reciprocally as the quantity
particles

### Corollary 4 

DE X
2
and D5& be made as
Jr Jtj
tracted
PS
X ^-
;
the force with which a corpuscle
by the whole sphere will be as the area
is
;
at-
ANB.
