---
title: "Lord Krśńa's Unique Approach"
heading: "Discourse 6"
description: ""
c: "indigo"
writer:
  name: PR Sarkar
  url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prabhat_Ranjan_Sarkar
weight: 18
date: 1967-09-17
---



All the characters in the Mahábhárata, from beginning to end, were simply puppets on the stage. 

They were made to dance by the tricks of Lord Krśńa alone. The life of Lord Krśńa justifies His practical approaches. 

<!-- However, I shall put forth a few out of many examples. -->

## Mahásambhúti

Lord Krśńa was Táraka Brahma. The advent of Táraka Brahma is known as “Mahásambhúti.”

According to natural law, the movement of the world from crude to subtle is accompanied by clash between good (Shubha) and evil (ashubha), between kśema and akśema. 

During this period, good people sometimes get exhausted by the dominance of the dishonest (pápii).

If this period were to continue some time more, the honest (sádhu) would be extinguished. 

If such a state of affairs exists in the world, a special force (visheśa shakti samprayoga) from Paramátman becomes a necessity.

To give a blow to the sinners (pápii) at this hour becomes an essentiality. Giving this blow is not possible for human beings (Jiiva) as they do not have the power to deal it.

During this state of affairs, to deal a strong blow, a special manifestation known as Mahásambhuti becomes inevitable.

Every unit is doing the work of Paramátman. Everyone is the expression of God. This is Paramátmá’s sambhúti. 

But to do great work which is not possible through the physical structure (adhara) of human beings, a special manifestation of God takes place (Ávirbháva) which is known as “Mahásambhúti.”

This is different from an incarnation (avatára).

“Avatára” means “descending,” to come in the form of a unit.

Every person is an avatara of Paramátman. The avatára is the sambhuti of Mahásambhúti.

There are also so many degrees (kot́i) of consciousness in the Jiivas that are the descendants of Paramátman. 

One is jiivakot́i. 

Paramátman has come in the form of jiivas.

Special force can also be expressed through these media. 

Another is Iishvarakot́i. 

Paramátman has come in the form of a Jiiva, but it has some special force.

It has special dominance, has the special power to do and get things done.

They say, power of Iishvarakot́i is 100 times more than that of jiivakot́i.

In this Iishvarakot́i also there are so many degrees.

The lowest Iishvarakot́i is kalávatára. It has the lowest power.

“Kalá” means 1/16th.

Kalávatára means that manifestation of Iishvarakot́i which has 1/16th the power of Iishvarakot́i. 

In Iishvarakoti there is also aḿshávatara, which possesses more power that kalávatára, Khańd́avatára is still more developed. 

These are the different stages of Iishvarakot́i, according to their powers.

Púrńávatára is the expression of the whole power. It is the same as Brahmakot́i.

Jiivakot́i, Iishvarakot́i and Brahmakot́i are expressions of Paramátman, i.e., all are manifestations of Paramátman.

All are His sambhúti. All jiivas are sambhúti and this Brahmakot́i is Púrńávatára.

Aḿshávatára, kalávatára, khańd́ávatára do work in a particular place, at a particular time and space, and leave the world.

Such mahapuruśas have come to the world in good number.

It is not possible to name them all.

But this Mahásambhúti stirs the entire world because of His special force.

Iishvarakot́i people advance due to their sádhaná.

The realizations of their sádhaná, the knowledge obtained by sádhaná, have contributed to the progress of the world. 

But Mahásambhúti, of the same order as Brahmakot́i, comes to the world to:
- educate people
- create a Cosmic vibration in the world

That vibration continues to guide society as long as it exists.

For example, Sadáshiva came some 7,000 years ago. His vibration continues to this day.

Similarly, some 3,500 years ago Lord Krśńa came to the world. He was also a Mahásambhúti.

He came to create a vibration in the world, to give a new direction to it.

Had He not come, society would have been destroyed. So Mahásambhúti is born to guide the world.

Mahásambhúti will behave like a human being. But Mahásambhúti’s every action will be a superhuman action so that people may take lessons (lokashikśá) from it.

<!-- Let us give an example.  -->

