---
title: "Planning for the Mahávishva"
heading: "Discourse 8"
description: ""
c: "indigo"
writer:
  name: PR Sarkar
  url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prabhat_Ranjan_Sarkar
weight: 22
date: 1967-09-17
---




Now the universe has become very small. People are able to travel from one planet to another.

When there was no convenience of conveyances, Lord Krśńa planned the Mahábhárata to unite the scattered India. 

Today the universe has become small. Planning for Mahávishva (The Great Universe) and not Mahábhárata (Great India), is required.

The guiding factor behind the creation of the Mahábhárata was dharma – the creation of a great human society in which there would be peace, happiness, fraternity and no poverty. 

In that period, it was the rule that the country was held responsible if a person died of starvation.

If there was an early death, if a child of five or so died, people regarded it as a flaw in the ruling structure.

Today you have to create Mahávishva (The Great Universe), and the guiding principle behind it will be that all human beings are the progeny of the Supreme Progenitor.

Hence all are His children, hence all should live together – nay, will have to live together.

Black or white, literate or illiterate, small or tall, all are the children of the same Father. Hence all will have to live together.

So the important thing is that all are the progeny of the Supreme Progenitor. 

According to this, there will be unity in the physical stratum, and so will there be in the psychic and spiritual strata. 

But to strengthen this unity yet more, there is one more factor which should be there, and is there – that factor being the common goal for all the children of the Supreme Father – the merger of all in Him.

All have come from Him and are in Him; therefore, all people will have to live together.

Remaining together is natural for you, and to remain disunited is something unnatural. You know well that unnaturality is not tolerated by Prakrti.

Unnaturality is ultimately destroyed. 

So it is natural for human beings to live together and to make a great Universe. By not doing so, and by mutual fight, all will be destroyed.

**This is the law of Prakrti.**

Hence, united you will have to remain, this is your duty.

So that the people of the world may remain united, it is your duty to bring the Mahavishva as soon as possible. 

There will be peace and happiness in the Universe, and, established in one indivisible ideology, humanity will march ahead toward the Supreme Goal. Victory be with you!

3 December 1967, Ranchi

