---
title: "Krśńa, the Author of the Mahábhárata War"
heading: "Discourse 11"
description: "The Mahábhárata war was not a spontaneous one. Rather, this great event was planned out by Lord Krśńa Himself"
c: "indigo"
writer:
  name: PR Sarkar
  url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prabhat_Ranjan_Sarkar
weight: 28
date: 1967-09-17
---



The Mahábhárata war was not a spontaneous one. Rather, this great event was planned out by Lord Krśńa Himself. 

What is mere mental imagination for Parama Puruśa seems real to human beings. Lord Krśńa is the central figure of the Mahábhárata.

He got His work done through different characters as per His own choice. He was God Himself in human form.

Lord Krśńa was considered to be the Nucleus of the Cosmic Circle. By dint of sádhaná, ordinary mortals can realize this Cosmic Nucleus.

Parama Puruśa as Mahásambhúti in human form can work as the Nucleus of this universe.

The poet Rabindranath described this Cosmic Nucleus as “jiivanadevatá” in his poetry.

Lord Krśńa selected a role for Himself also.

Parama Puruśa, the Creator of this universe:
- planned the Mahábhárata in such a way that human beings might get inspiration to make further progress in all walks of life
- helped eliminate the weaknesses and vices of the society
- infused new vitality and strength into the social structure

He infused spiritual power into Arjuna and removed his psychic confusion.

When He was in his mother’s womb, His mother Devakii was physically much weaker than before. Yet Devakii and His father Vasudeva didn’t submit to pressure from Kamsa.

He provided strength and inspiration to the gate-keepers and king Nanda.

He exerted pressure on the mind of Duryodhana, and on the minds of Sudama and the other gopas of Vrndavan.

The gopas of Vrindavana dearly loved Him.

But they didn’t accept Him as the Nucleus of the Cycle of Creation, as no other than Puruśottama Krśńa Himself. 

That’s why, on the eve of His departure from Vrndavan, they lay down before the wheels of His chariot. 

They wanted Him to give His word that He would again return to Vrindavana.

Krśńa did not give them His word, but instead He said, “My body may not be in Vrindavana, but my mind will always remain here.”

Lord Krśńa has no role in the first and last parts of the Mahábhárata. 

We see Him again and again only in the middle of the Mahábhárata. He Himself created circumstances in such a way that the people of the world gave Him a tremendous ovation during His lifetime, and made a proper evaluation of His personality after His death. He had only one purpose behind infusing strength in His supporters and striking at His opponents – to create a congenial environment for the Mahábhárata.

Jarasandha, the powerful king of Magadha, had two daughters, Asti and Prapti. Both of them were married to Kansa, the tyrannical king of Mathura. King Jarasandha had been killing kings and vassals in the name of tantra sádhaná. This demoniacal practice created an atmosphere of savagery. So it became imperative to eliminate Jarasandha from the earth.

In those days it was not easy to do 2 noble things:

1. To make the people understand the need to create Mahábhárata (a great and unified India) based on dharma

2. To infuse requisite strength and vigour in His supporters and strike at His opponents, in order to create the Mahábhárata. 

Lord Krśńa wanted to establish dharmarájya, wherein members of society would get ample scope to discharge their social obligations. In those days it was not at all easy for Lord Krśńa to introduce the sadvipra samaj.

Sadvipras are those who are deeply spiritual, who love human beings above anything else, and who are absolutely selfless. The power of administration must not be entrusted to those people who are selfish and who have no love for humanity. The power of Government must be left to those who are genuine servants of mankind.


21 April 1968, Ranchi