---
title: "Krśńa, the Nucleus of the Universe"
heading: "Discourse 12"
description: "The events of the Mahábhárata, as designed by Lord Krśńa, were real, or seemed to be real historical facts to the masses"
c: "indigo"
writer:
  name: PR Sarkar
  url: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prabhat_Ranjan_Sarkar
weight: 35
date: 1968-04-28
---



The events of the Mahábhárata, as designed by Lord Krśńa, were real, or seemed to be real historical facts to the masses.

This entire quinquelemental universe is just the mental imagination of Parama Puruśa, a macro-psychic conation. 

All the characters and events in the Mahábhárata were the products of the Cosmic imagination. But for humans they are as good as real. 

Lord Krśńa selected one specific role for Himself to play.

Parama Puruśa is not a representative of a particular age. 

He remains in His individual and collective pervasive association, in all countries, in all ages, in all microcosms. 

He is the life-force of the entire universe.

This expressed universe, though vast (vishála) is not infinite (virát́a).

Though theoretically this universe is within the scope of measurement, in reality it’s not easy to measure it.

The measurement of infinity is possible neither theoretically nor practically. 

This expressed universe is bound by the bondages of the static principle. This is why it has its limitations.

In other spheres, the sentient and mutative principles are active, but the static is inactive. 

All these principles have their expressions, and that expression takes the form of bondage or limitations.

This universe of ours has emanated from Nirguńa Brahma and is dominated by the static principle of Prakrti.

It still it has a Nucleus of its own.

This universal Nucleus or hub is Parama Puruśa, or Puruśottama Shrii Krśńa Himself, Who expresses Himself both internally and externally.

Now in His own creation He has kept a special role for Himself.

Such a personality is known as “Mahásambhúti.” 

Lord Shiva was one such personality; Lord Krśńa was another such personality. 

He is beyond the scope of relativity, beyond the barriers of time, space and person. 

He has His sub-centres (upakendra) in each and every microcosm.

During His advent as Mahásambhúti, these sub-centres also start working in full swing. He always controls the sub-centres whether He is in Mahásambhuti or not.

Lord Krśńa was in possession of occult powers from His childhood on.

Some persons attain divinity by dint of prolonged sadhana, for instance Buddha and many others like him.

But Lord Krśńa was an embodiment of Divine force from the time of His very birth. So He had no spiritual teacher as such. He Himself was the original Preceptor. 

Lord Shiva, Lord Krśńa were expressions of the same entity, but there was a time difference of 3500 years. 

Both of them were Mahásambhúti, and the sub-centres were jiivátmas, or unit consciousnesses which remained attached to living human bodies.

The personal relationship between Parama Puruśa and a unit, individual is termed “ota-yoga,” and His pervasive association with the collectivity is termed “prota-yoga.” Lord Krśńa in human form – the historical Krśńa – Himself was such a sub-centre.


Parama Puruśa is the Absolute or Supreme Controller of all human actions. 

Each and every entity of this created world is attracted towards other entities. Attraction is a natural law. Repulsion is negative attraction.

One who feels attracted towards subtle objects will not feel any attraction towards crude objects. 

Human beings as a rule feel much attraction towards Lord Krśńa, for He is the final repository of supreme bliss. 

His irresistible attraction makes people almost mad. 

That’s why He is called Krśńa, that is, one who attracts others towards himself.

“Krśńa” has another meaning – one on whom depends others’ existence (“He exists, therefore I exist”). Human intellect is His gift. 

The human mind is a gift from Him. Even the very limbs of the human body are gifts from Him. Once the mind is separated from the human body, the latter starts decomposing right away. 

Even the tiny protozoic cells act as sub-centres around the main centre, and the very existence of all these cells is absolutely dependent on Krśńa.


28 April 1968, Ranchi

