---
heading: Chapter 14
title: "Decomposition"
c: "firebrick"
description: ""
date: 2025-09-23
weight: 53
---


1. Faced by the increasing hostility of the environment and by the legislative,
administrative and judicial practice born of that hostility, entrepreneurs and
capitalists—in fact the whole stratum that accepts the bourgeois scheme of
life—will eventually cease to function. Their standard aims are rapidly
becoming unattainable, their efforts futile. The most glamorous of these
bourgeois aims, the foundation of an industrial dynasty, has in most countries
become unattainable already, and even more modest ones are so difficult to
attain that they may cease to be thought worth the struggle as the
permanence of these conditions is being increasingly realized.

Considering the role of bourgeois motivation in the explanation of the
economic history of the last two or three centuries, its smothering by the
unfavorable reactions of society or its weakening by disuse no doubt constitutes
a factor adequate to explain a flop in the capitalist process—should we ever
observe it as a permanent phenomenon—and one that is much more important
than any of those that are presented by the Theory of Vanishing Investment
Opportunity. It is hence interesting to observe that that motivation not only is
threatened by forces external to the bourgeois mind but that it also tends to die
out from internal causes. There is of course close interdependence between the
two. But we cannot get at the true diagnosis unless we try to disentangle them.

One of those “internal causes” we have already met with. I have dubbed it
Evaporation of the Substance of Property. We have seen that, normally, the
modern businessman, whether entrepreneur or mere managing administrator, is
of the executive type. From the logic of his position he acquires something of
the psychology of the salaried employee working in a bureaucratic organization.
Whether a stockholder or not, his will to fight and to hold on is not and cannot
be what it was with the man who knew ownership and its responsibilities in the
fullblooded sense of those words. His system of values and his conception of
duty undergo a profound change. Mere stockholders of course have ceased to
count at all—quite independently of the clipping of their share by a regulating
and taxing state. Thus the modern corporation, although the product of the
capitalist process, socializes the bourgeois mind; it relentlessly narrows the scope
of capitalist motivation; not only that, it will eventually kill its roots.1

<!-- 1 Many people will deny this. This is due to the fact that they derive their impression
from past history and from the slogans generated by past history during which the -->

2. Still more important however is another “internal cause,” viz., the
disintegration of the bourgeois family. The facts to which I am referring are
too well known to need explicit statement. To men and women in modern
capitalist societies, family life and parenthood mean less than they meant
before and hence are less powerful molders of behavior; the rebellious son
or daughter who professes contempt for “Victorian” standards is, however
incorrectly, expressing an undeniable truth. The weight of these facts is not
impaired by our inability to measure them statistically. The marriage rate
proves nothing because the term Marriage covers as many sociological
meanings as does the term Property, and the kind of alliance that used to be
formed by the marriage contract may completely die out without any change
in the legal construction or in the frequency of the contract. 

Nor is the
divorce rate more significant. It does not matter how many marriages are
dissolved by judicial decree—what matters is how many lack the content
essential to the old pattern. If in our statistical age readers insist on a
statistical measure, the proportion of marriages that produce no children or
only one child, though still inadequate to quantify the phenomenon I mean,
might come as near as we can hope to come to indicating its numerical
importance. The phenomenon by now extends, more or less, to all classes.
But it first appeared in the bourgeois (and intellectual) stratum and its
symptomatic as well as causal value for our purposes lies entirely there. It
is wholly attributable to the rationalization of everything in life, which we
have seen is one of the effects of capitalist evolution. In fact, it is but one
of the results of the spread of that rationalization to the sphere of private life.
All the other factors which are usually adduced in explanation can be readily
reduced to that one.

As soon as men and women learn the utilitarian lesson and refuse to take
for granted the traditional arrangements that their social environment makes
for them, as soon as they acquire the habit of weighing the individual
advantages and disadvantages of any prospective course of action—or, as we
might also put it, as soon as they introduce into their private life a sort of
inarticulate system of cost accounting—they cannot fail to become aware of
the heavy personal sacrifices that family ties and especially parenthood entail
under modern conditions and of the fact that at the same time, excepting the
cases of farmers and peasants, children cease to be economic assets. These
sacrifices do not consist only of the items that come within the reach of the
institutional change brought about by the big corporation had not yet asserted itself. Also
they may think of the scope which corporate business used to give for illegal satisfactions
of the capitalist motivation. But that would cut my way: the fact that personal gain
beyond salary and bonus cannot, in corporate business, be reaped by executives except
by illegal or semi-illegal practices shows precisely that the structural idea of the
corporation is averse to it.

measuring rod of money but comprise in addition an indefinite amount of loss
of comfort, of freedom from care, and opportunity to enjoy alternatives of
increasing attractiveness and variety—alternatives to be compared with joys
of parenthood that are being subjected to a critical analysis of increasing
severity. 

The implication of this is not weakened but strengthened by the fact
that the balance sheet is likely to be incomplete, perhaps even fundamentally
wrong. For the greatest of the assets, the contribution made by parenthood to
physical and moral health—to “normality” as we might express it—particularly
in the case of women, almost invariably escapes the rational searchlight of
modern individuals who, in private as in public life, tend to focus attention
on ascertainable details of immediate utilitarian relevance and to sneer at the
idea of hidden necessities of human nature or of the social organism. The point
I wish to convey is, I think, clear without further elaboration. It may be
summed up in the question that is so clearly in many potential parents’ minds:
“Why should we stunt our ambitions and impoverish our lives in order to be
insulted and looked down upon in our old age?”

While the capitalist process, by virtue of the psychic attitudes it creates,
progressively dims the values of family life and removes the conscientious
inhibitions that an old moral tradition would have put in the way toward a
different scheme of life, it at the same time implements the new tastes. As
regards childlessness, capitalist inventiveness produces contraceptive devices
of ever-increasing efficiency that overcome the resistance which the strongest
impulse of man would otherwise have put up. As regards the style of life,
capitalist evolution decreases the desirability of, and provides alternatives to,
the bourgeois family home. I have previously adverted to the Evaporation
of Industrial Property; I have now to advert to the Evaporation of
Consumers’ Property.

Until the later decades of the nineteenth century, the town house and the
country place were everywhere not only pleasant and convenient shells of
private life on the higher levels of income, but they were indispensable.
Not only hospitality on any scale and in any style, but even the comfort,
dignity, repose and refinement of the family depended upon its having an
adequate foyer of its own that was adequately staffed. The arrangements
summarized by the term Home were accordingly accepted as a matter of
course by the average man and woman of bourgeois standing, exactly as
they looked upon marriage and children—the “founding of a family”—as
a matter of course.

Now, on the one hand, the amenities of the bourgeois home are becoming
less obvious than are its burdens. To the critical eye of a critical age it is likely
to appear primarily as a source of trouble and expense which frequently fail
to justify themselves. 

This would be so even independently of modern taxation and wages and of the attitude of modern household personnel, all of which
are typical results of the capitalist process and of course greatly strengthen the
case against what in the near future will be almost universally recognized as
an outmoded and uneconomical way of life. In this respect as in others we are
living in a transitional stage. The average family of bourgeois standing tends
to reduce the difficulties of running the big house and the big country place
by substituting for it small and mechanized establishments plus a maximum
of outside service and outside life—hospitality in particular being increasingly
shifted to the restaurant or club.

On the other hand, the home of the old type is no longer an indispensable
requirement of comfortable and refined living in the bourgeois sphere. The
apartment house and the apartment hotel represent a rationalized type of
abode and another style of life which when fully developed will no doubt
meet the new situation and provide all the essentials of comfort and
refinement. To be sure, neither that style nor its shell are fully developed
anywhere as yet and they proffer cost advantage only if we count in the
trouble and annoyance incident to running a modern home. But other
advantages they proffer already—the facility of using to the full the variety
of modern enjoyments, of travel, of ready mobility, of shifting the load of
the current little things of existence to the powerful shoulders of highly
specialized organizations.

It is easy to see how this in turn bears, in the upper strata of capitalist
society, upon the problems of the child. Again there is interaction: the
passing of the spacious home—in which alone the rich life of a numerous
family can unfold 2 —and the increasing friction with which it functions
supply another motive for avoiding the cares of parenthood; but the decline
of philoprogenitivity in turn renders the spacious home less worth while.
I have said that the new style of bourgeois life does not as yet offer any
decisive cost advantage. But this refers only to the current or prime costs of
servicing the wants of private life. As to overhead, even the purely pecuniary
advantage is obvious already. And inasmuch as the outlay on the most
durable elements of home life—especially the house, the pictures, the
furniture—used to be financed mainly from previous earnings we may say
that the need for accumulation of “consumers’ capital” is drastically reduced
by that process. This does not mean of course that demand for “consumers’
capital” is at present, even relatively, smaller than it was; the increasing
demand for durable consumers’ goods from small and medium incomes
more than counter-balances this effect. But it does mean that, so far as the
hedonistic component in the pattern of acquisitive motives is concerned, the

<!-- 2 Modern relations between parents and children are of course partly conditioned by the
crumbling of that steady frame of family life. -->

desirability of incomes beyond a certain level is reduced. In order to satisfy
himself of this, the reader need only visualize the situation in a thoroughly
practical spirit: the successful man or couple or the “society” man or couple
who can pay for the best available accommodation in hotel, ship and train,
and for the best available qualities of the objects of personal consumption
and use—which qualities are increasingly being turned out by the conveyor
of mass production 3
—will, things being what they are, as a rule have all they
want with any intensity for themselves. And it is easy to see that a budget
framed on those lines will be far below the requirements of a “seignioral”
style of life.

