---
heading: Chapter 11b
title: "The Vanishing Of Investment Opportunity"
c: "firebrick"
description: ""
date: 2025-09-21
weight: 40
---


Pre-capitalist man is in fact no less “grabbing” than capitalist man.

Peasant serfs for instance or warrior lords assert their self-interest with a
brutal energy all their own. But capitalism develops rationality and adds a
new edge to it in two interconnected ways.

First it exalts the monetary unit—not itself a creation of capitalism—into a unit of account. That is to say, capitalist practice turns the unit of money into a tool of rational cost-profit calculations, of which the towering monument is double-entry bookkeeping. 4 Without going into this, we will notice that, primarily a product of the evolution of economic rationality, the cost-profit calculus in turn reacts upon that rationality; by crystallizing and defining numerically, it powerfully propels the logic of enterprise.

Thus defined and quantified for the economic sector, this type of logic or attitude or method then starts upon its conqueror’s career subjugating—rationalizing—man’s tools and philosophies, his medical practice, his picture
of the cosmos, his outlook on life, everything in fact including his concepts
of beauty and justice and his spiritual ambitions.

<!-- 4 This element has been stressed, and more suo overstressed, by Sombart. Double-entry
bookkeeping is the last step on a long and tortuous road. Its immediate predecessor was the
practice of making up from time to time an inventory and figuring out profit or loss; see
A.Sapori in Biblioteca Storica Toscana, VII. 1932. Luca Pacioli’s treatise on bookkeeping, 1494,
supplies by its date an important milestone. For the history and sociology of the state it is a
vital fact to notice that rational bookkeeping did not intrude into the management of public
funds until the eighteenth century and that even then it did so imperfectly and in the primitive
form of “cameralist” bookkeeping. -->


In this respect it is highly significant that modern mathematico- experimental science developed, in the fifteenth, sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, not only along with the social process usually referred to as the Rise of Capitalism, but also outside of the fortress of scholastic thought and in the face of its contemptuous hostility. 

In the 15th century mathematics was mainly concerned with questions of commercial arithmetic and the problems of the architect. 

The utilitarian mechanical device, invented by men of the craftsman type, stood at the source of modern physics. The rugged individualism of Galileo was the individualism of the rising capitalist class. The surgeon began to rise above the midwife and the barber.

The artist who at the same time was an engineer and an entrepreneur—the type immortalized by such men as Vinci, Alberti, Cellini; even Dürer busied himself with plans for fortifications—illustrates best of all what I mean. By cursing it all, scholastic professors in the Italian universities showed more sense than we give them credit for. The trouble was not with individual unorthodox propositions. Any decent schoolman could be trusted to twist his texts so as to fit the Copernican system. But those professors quite rightly sensed the spirit behind such exploits—the spirit of rationalist individualism, the spirit generated by rising capitalism.

Second, rising capitalism produced not only the mental attitude of modern science, the attitude that consists in asking certain questions and in going about answering them in a certain way, but also the men and the means. By breaking up the feudal environment and disturbing the intellectual peace of manor and village (though there always was, of course, plenty to discuss and to fall out about in a convent), but especially by creating the social space for a new class that stood upon individual achievement in the economic field, it in turn attracted to that field the strong wills and the strong intellects. 

Precapitalist economic life left no scope for achievement that would carry over class boundaries or, to put it differently, be adequate to create social positions comparable to those of the members of the then ruling classes. Not that it precluded ascent in general. 5 But business activity was, broadly speaking, essentially subordinate, even at the peak of success within the craft guild, and it hardly ever led out of it. The main avenues to advancement and large gain were the church—nearly as accessible throughout the Middle Ages as it is now—to which we may add the chanceries of the great territorial magnates, and the hierarchy of warrior lords—quite accessible to every man who was physically and psychically fit until about the middle of the twelfth century, and not quite inaccessible thereafter.

<!-- 5 We are too prone to look upon the medieval social structure as static or rigid. As a matter
of fact, there was an incessant—to use Pareto’s term—circulation des aristocracies. The
elements that composed the uppermost stratum around 900 had practically disappeared by 1500. -->


It was only when capitalist enterprise—first commercial and financial, then mining, finally industrial— unfolded its possibilities that supernormal ability and ambition began to turn to business as a third avenue. Success was quick and conspicuous, but it has been much exaggerated as regards the social weight it carried at first. If we look closely at the career of Jacob Fugger, for instance, or of Agostino Chigi, we easily satisfy ourselves that they had very little to do with steering the policies of Charles V or of Pope Leo X and that they paid heavily for such privileges as they enjoyed. 6 Yet entrepreneurial success was fascinating enough for everyone excepting the highest strata of feudal society to draw most of the best brains and thus to generate further success—to generate additional steam for the rationalist engine. So, in this sense, capitalism—and not merely economic activity in general—has after all been the propelling force of the rationalization of human behavior.

Now we are at long last face to face with the immediate goal 7 to which that complex yet inadequate argument was to lead.

Not only the modern mechanized plant and the volume of the output that pours forth from it, not only modern technology and economic organization, but all the features and achievements of modern civilization are, directly or indirectly, the products of the capitalist process. They must be included in any balance sheet of it and in any verdict about its deeds or misdeeds.

There is the growth of rational science and the long list of its applications. Airplanes, refrigerators, television and that sort of thing are immediately recognizable as results of the profit economy. But although the modern hospital is not as a rule operated for profit, it is nonetheless the product of capitalism not only, to repeat, because the capitalist process supplies the means and the will, but much more fundamentally because capitalist rationality supplied the habits of mind that evolved the methods used in these hospitals.

The victories, not yet completely won but in the offing, over cancer, syphilis and tuberculosis will be as much capitalist achievements as motorcars or pipe lines or Bessemer steel have been. In the case of medicine, there is a capitalist profession behind the methods, capitalist both because to a large extent it works in a business spirit and because it is an emulsion of the industrial and commercial bourgeoisie. But even if that were not so, modern medicine and hygiene would still be by-products of the capitalist process just as is modern education.

<!-- 6 The Medici are not really an exception. For though their wealth helped them to acquire
control of the Florentine commonwealth, it was this control and not the wealth per se which
accounts for the role played by the family. In any case they are the only merchants that ever
rose to a footing of equality with the uppermost stratum of the feudal world. Real exceptions
we find only where capitalist evolution created an environment or completely broke up the
feudal stratum—in Venice and in the Netherlands for instance.
7 The immediate goal, because the analysis contained in the last pages will stand us in good
stead also for other purposes. It is in fact fundamental for any serious discussion of the great
theme of Capitalism and Socialism. -->


There is the capitalist art and the capitalist style of life. If we limit ourselves to painting as an example, both for brevity’s sake and because in that field my ignorance is slightly less complete than it is in others, and if (wrongly, as I think) we agree to start an epoch with Giotto’s Arena frescoes and then follow the line (nothing short of damnable though such “linear” arguments are) Giotto—Masaccio—Vinci—Michelangelo—Greco, no amount of emphasis on mystical ardors in the case of Greco can obliterate my point for anyone who has eyes that see. And Vinci’s experiments are offered to doubters who wish, as it were, to touch the capitalist rationality with their fingertips.

This line if projected (yes, I know) could be made to land us (though perhaps gasping) in the contrast between Delacroix and Ingres. Well, and there we are; Cézanne, Van Gogh, Picasso or Matisse will do the rest. Expressionist liquidation of the object forms an admirably logical conclusion. The story of the capitalist novel (culminating in the Goncourt novel: “documents written up”) would illustrate still better. But that is obvious. The evolution of the capitalist style of life could be easily—and perhaps most tellingly—described in terms of the genesis of the modern lounge suit.
